Jesse Spencer-Smith: I'll have that for you in just one moment.
Jesse Spencer-Smith: Okay, passcode is 464.
Jesse Spencer-Smith: 543.
Jesse Spencer-Smith: No.
Jesse Spencer-Smith: No, I'll be sharing my screen, and go ahead and…
John Ellis: Oh yeah, the speakers, yeah. You're welcome. I'm just sharing it, I'm just human being…
John Ellis: No, okay, yeah.
John Ellis: Yeah, we can move those chairs a little bit.
John Ellis: Chair of smoothies? Yeah.
John Ellis: Still moved up to the front, you'll be able to see better.
John Ellis: Let's grate on top of it.
John Ellis: Because he's holding it here?
John Ellis: That's not relevant.
John Ellis: I've been listening to it now. Yeah.
John Ellis: So how I said, they just did a… to see it.
John Ellis: Please switch.
John Ellis: First, it was beginning.
John Ellis: Yeah, absolutely.
John Ellis: Excellent.
John Ellis: Yeah, yeah.
John Ellis: Yeah, I even practicing.
John Ellis: I'll take it.
John Ellis: is very interested in those, to see if I can use it.
John Ellis: Yes, and it's like… I can't see that anymore.
John Ellis: No wonder Phil's not fair yet.
John Ellis: Doctors, pastors.
John Ellis: Well, it's a temptation to use AI for making their service. Yeah, we don't want to do that. Yeah, so if they can regain that time, it's absolutely…
John Ellis: That's just chill.
John Ellis: So much it?
John Ellis: Yes, bye.
John Ellis: What?
John Ellis: So he's probably not read about that, but…
John Ellis: That's smart.
John Ellis: Let's just…
John Ellis: This is me.
John Ellis: Go to find your balance.
John Ellis: We do some weird essential research kits every year with my videos. Yeah.
John Ellis: So, this is the first time where we really just concentrated on… Yep, so it's,
John Ellis: And of course, this one is really important. So much has changed in the last… Yeah, exactly. You know, I usually teach that flight.
John Ellis: Oh, I realize. I've been using that for 4 years now.
John Ellis: No, I don't feel confident teaching it any tests, because there's so much news. Yeah, exactly. Well, I mean, we're going to be covering a lot here, so… and we'll have all the materials available, too, so… That's why. Maybe I have to be, like, the basis of it. But once again, not my love.
John Ellis: Tomorrow, you got one of the board agents in the morning. Yeah. Right, right, yes, exactly. Last time you spoke there, I missed it.
John Ellis: Oh, no! At least I'll learn the skills this afternoon. Oh, absolutely, absolutely. And we'll,
John Ellis: Yes, and like I said, we'll have really good materials on this as well, which then can be used. We'll go… we'll actually be talking about how to restructure these materials a little bit. Yeah, no, absolutely.
John Ellis: Oh, yeah, absolutely.
John Ellis: Okay, that'll swap right now.
John Ellis: Yes, Mrs.
John Ellis: Excellent.
John Ellis: It's no doubt.
John Ellis: We're going to be getting started up in just about 5 more minutes. We shifted our coffee break just a little bit, so we're going to be starting up in about 5 more minutes. Feel free to go ahead and get some more breakfast if you've not already had some, and some coffee as well.
John Ellis: Oh, yes.
John Ellis: sort of set out, so…
John Ellis: No, never stop. No, no.
John Ellis: relates to this, you're impossible. So…
John Ellis: newspapers. Because this was a research project that I worked on for several years, and I get all of the years I needed to research. And there are multiple best places to find historical music. Some of them are behind walls, some of them
John Ellis: the word outside, right? Yeah.
John Ellis: That's, that's one thing that I've come up with that would be really helpful. Absolutely, and yeah, Lisa, the interesting thing is that in addition to the, the… Oh, thank you, and that'll, that'll be fine, because I'll be walking around with it. Yes, thank you. Is, you know, absolutely, because models have the ability to,
John Ellis: Sort of go up to the front, figure out where the payoff is, and say, alright, you know.
John Ellis: need help with this. Right, right. Also include the documents and figure out, like, the different formats.
John Ellis: And actually figure out what two would be most appropriate to actually get materialistic, and then to assess materials as well, even though it's deja. You could say that this appears to be, you know, so I was using a model, actually, to look at, like, ancient Lithuanian, and some of it was handwritten Lithuanian, some of it was an imperial writing in the same document. Here's what's Connie Harris Portland. Here's a birth document.
John Ellis: So that's… it can be automated to the point where you can say, agent going to be able to tell us where there is those problems.
John Ellis: And then there is that whole issue of genealogical… Right, oh, absolutely. Oh, with the graphs. Right. You know, the Imperial Washington, and the Creek Lake, and the… Right. Which, somewhat… the Gemini model is very…
John Ellis: Gemini, is very good. Other models, not to mention. But, I mean, that's, that's the… Now, some of those are agent frameworks that you might actually have to, like, have help building, but you might use this on your own and say.
John Ellis: Right? We'll see some examples of, but, yeah, no, absolutely much more accessible than it was before. Good, good, good, good. Yeah.
John Ellis: And Fred Brown was the first woman ordained as a minister. Fantastic. And she's the person I've done a lot of research on, and I've done two exhibits in her case. And so, like I said, I didn't get through all of these things, because I was just… it took me forever just to look through stuff. Which was not you practicing the top of your license, right? You're like, how do I get it? How do I
John Ellis: I downloaded, now I gotta get it open. Now I can inspect them. But even then, you might be filtering, you might say, okay, what are the ones where you are, where it makes sense, you're certain, put those here, but the ones you're unsure, I want to see those right now. Yeah.
John Ellis: a source article that then distributed to all the newspapers in the United States, and they all run the same article. Right. And so be able to identify, okay, yep, same one.
John Ellis: Slight change in wording, but same quotes, same, yeah, thing, absolutely. All of that stuff is… Fantastic. Good, thank you. Absolutely.
John Ellis: to the staff.
John Ellis: It's a smartphone.
John Ellis: All right, let's go ahead and get started up then. I'd like to thank you all very much for, for being here, and also thank you for adapting to the last-minute, change and the schedule. I appreciate you all being here a half hour earlier than we'd originally intended, but that was the only time, because of a schedule change, that we could get, Matt in. So I'm thrilled you were able to be here for the conversation.
John Ellis: We're switching up the schedule just a little bit. I put our copy break in to give us a chance to get these installed here. Let me give you an overview of the days. Broadly, the very first day, we're going to be covering the important issues around AI models on a more theoretical level.
John Ellis: But this is going to serve as the foundation of the second day's work that is going to culminate in you actually using these tools to create some solutions.
John Ellis: during the conversation with Matt, I specifically mentioned the success that we've had in our AI Fridays and our AI Deep Dives. Once we got someone over the first
John Ellis: Hop.
John Ellis: of understanding what was happening, and just the technical part of how you actually get co-work installed. How many people had issues installing co-work?
John Ellis: Yes. Oh, how… okay.
John Ellis: how many people actually tried to install COWORKS? Let me get that as a baseline, because I know some people have been… okay, there we go. So.
John Ellis: Interesting thing, co-work, as we're gonna see in a little bit, is designed to make things easy for you once it is installed.
John Ellis: But…
John Ellis: I don't know about you, but I've got a number of you who've never even heard of Hypervisor, and why it's necessary for this to be able to run. So, we're going to help you get that figured out tomorrow as well, but by the end of this, the idea is that you actually can attempt some solutions to the ideas that you have.
John Ellis: We also want to very intentionally, bring people together in conversation.
John Ellis: So, a little bit later on today, as a matter of fact, we are going to be sending out emails, we're going to be doing it together, I'm going to show you how I did this, that are going to make prospective suggestions about people you probably want to talk to, 3 people you probably want to talk to here.
John Ellis: Where you have overlaps in your research, or in the methodology, or the questions that you're addressing.
John Ellis: Plus, it has one person in there that is very dissimilar to your work, but there still might be connection. So, a little bit of an experiment to see if we can use
John Ellis: reasoning models to make those types of suggestions. So today, we're going to be starting with, in just a bit, we're going to start talking about introduction of AI capabilities at Vanderbilt, what we have, and we're going to be talking about security as well.
John Ellis: Then we're going to be going into a deep dive into how LLMs actually work. This is going to be high level, but you're going to actually understand at the end of this session better than about 90% of the people that you know
John Ellis: how LLMs actually work.
John Ellis: Then we're going to be talking about the psychology of human-AI collaboration. It turns out that there are some definite soft spots of, of how the models work, and
John Ellis: things that we need to be aware of, of how the models work, and how they play into our heuristics and our biases, because it's not all good news, and we need to be aware of those as we use models so we can use them responsibly. Then we're going to be talking and looking at agents in action.
John Ellis: So, we've been talking about agents, we're going to give you a good sense of what they are.
John Ellis: We're going to have lunch. I'm going to point out that lunch, the restaurant here, is going to be open for lunch. You're also welcome to go further, around as well, but know that it's going to be available here.
John Ellis: Then we're going to be talking about agents in more depth. We're going to be talking about something called agent skills. How many people here have heard about skills?
John Ellis: Okay, so a few folks… alright, alright, not bad. How many of you are aware of the tech stock sell-off about 3 weeks ago, where it was about $283 billion worth of market capitalization, where that was kind of wiped out?
John Ellis: Yep.
John Ellis: Did you know that that was caused by the release of a suite of skills?
John Ellis: of Agent Skills.
John Ellis: So, we're going to actually be taking a look at this technology, which is going to be playing a very interesting role. It is… it is one of these capabilities and partial solutions that I consider to be socio-technical. It addresses not just technical need, but the needs of the organizations and the individuals as well.
John Ellis: Then we're going to be talking about AI in your, in your, I'm sorry, then we're going to be talking about defining AI augmented academic projects. Let's see, Abby, so we're going to have, Dr. Picilante, one of our postdoctoral fellows at the Data Science Institute, speaking on when AI helps and when it doesn't.
John Ellis: Then we're gonna have Professor Jesse Bloker, who's gonna… it's actually gonna be a bunch of us speaking on AI in our everyday academic life, and I'm going to be sharing how you can easily create
John Ellis: and update your CV.
John Ellis: quickly, Relatively painlessly, and use the new Provost's template while you're doing it.
John Ellis: So, that'll… that'll… that'll earn your time here, even, even just that.
John Ellis: Then we're going to be talking about, clawed for marketing. Very broad, so marketing for academic programs can be very, clawed for marketing very broadly. The interesting thing about this is.
John Ellis: This is going to be presented by Miguel Nunez, who's with the Data Science Institute, head of our events and marketing.
John Ellis: Who is not a programmer?
John Ellis: He has an MBA.
John Ellis: He's not… not technical, but he has created skills. He has created software
John Ellis: to solve many problems that he had in solving the broad problem of marketing. So you'll get a view of what it looks like to use these tools to solve real problems when you yourself don't have a technical background.
John Ellis: Then tomorrow, we're gonna be starting at 9.
John Ellis: Professor Shara Bell is going to be talking about AI architecture, so you'll get an idea of what it looks like inside of an agent, so you get comfortable with what it actually… how it is actually working.
John Ellis: We're going to be talking about building AI research assistants. This is going to be, Umang Chaudhry, one of our senior data scientists, who actually has built multiple solutions using,
John Ellis: Agent skills across a wide variety of applications.
John Ellis: That's one of the… one of the privileged places that we hold at the CCC, where we work in multiple fields at once, and so we have a very good sense of applications across fields.
John Ellis: And Data Science Institute, we've been doing that for quite some time. Then we're gonna have Umuang and also Mark Williams. Mark, are you here today? No, you weren't here. Mark was not even going to be here today. Mark's one of the founders of Vanderbilt AI Law Lab.
John Ellis: And he and Umar are going to be talking about IP bias and privacy. These are going to be the essential things for you to know before you use AI in your research.
John Ellis: After lunch tomorrow, Miranda Shirk, one of our senior data scientists, is going to be talking about specification-driven development.
John Ellis: Building research tools without coding.
John Ellis: I…
John Ellis: was speaking with Matt before, and said, almost a little bit flippantly, that the most popular programming language is English right now.
John Ellis: That is very much true, but part of what's important to make software development without programming work
John Ellis: is to be clear about your specifications. Miranda's going to be talking about that.
John Ellis: Then we're going to be talking about actual hands… we're going to be talking about designing AI-enhanced courses, so this is going to be how you might
John Ellis: not only just use AI within a course, but actually use AI to engage in a different way. And so the idea here is that you find a different way to explore and to carry out your academic pursuits, and then you expose that to students.
John Ellis: So this is not just about adopting some AI in your class, this is about what doors are opened
John Ellis: For you and for students, if you use
John Ellis: agentic AI. And then finally.
John Ellis: Two hours in the afternoon, we're going to be building your solution. We're going to be here, we're going to be upstairs where we have tables as well. The idea there is that you apply everything that you've learned, and you actually begin building some solutions. So we'll be circulating around, we're going to have all of our data science team around to help you as you build solutions. Questions before we begin about the schedule, about any of the logistics?
John Ellis: All right.
John Ellis: Then, let's go ahead and start talking about,
John Ellis: AI at Vanderbilt, and what tools we have here.
John Ellis: If you have not already visited, do check your email. This is a repository.
John Ellis: This is a GitHub repository. This is an easy way to version information. Not necessarily the prettiest way, but it does, it does work. You'll find, as we are loading up our materials.
John Ellis: all of our information is going to end up here. Some of it may not be here right now, but you'll be able to go back to this, you'll find links to recordings here, you'll be able to find all of the resources that we're talking about, all the slides, you'll find the transcript turned into a tutorial form.
John Ellis: Right here. So, keep hold of this, you'll be able to use this.
John Ellis: Pro tip!
John Ellis: If you want to give a lecture on AI, or include something, you can use this material, put it into one of the agents, and say.
John Ellis: here's my class, here's the background, use this material, use what I've written to create a new outline, perhaps even talking points, maybe even go ahead and create the PowerPoint presentations for me.
John Ellis: Pretty meta.
John Ellis: Alright, let's go and talk about,
John Ellis: Let's go and talk about, The…
John Ellis: capabilities and what we have here, at, at, Vanderbilt.
John Ellis: So, let's see, Introduction to AI capabilities, there we go. I'm going to show this up this way.
John Ellis: So, first of all, I want to point out something here.
John Ellis: You're gonna notice this… is,
John Ellis: what is called a markdown document.
John Ellis: So, a Markdown document Is, is a document that,
John Ellis: As a particular simple type of formatting.
John Ellis: And we're gonna zoom in on this side.
John Ellis: You're gonna start seeing this format more and more and more. When it's rendered, it looks nice over this way. But here's the key, it is readable by humans, and it is also easily processed by AI.
John Ellis: AI can absolutely read Word documents, but you'll notice it takes longer, and it has to figure out all of the complex embeddings, and it also takes a lot more tokens. It takes more time, it takes more compute. More and more, you're going to start seeing people just using Markdown documents, because it's very simple formatting, very clean, and very efficient to process with AI. All of my materials are going to actually be in Markdown format.
John Ellis: And I'll either use the formatted version, or I'll use the raw version. I want to start with just the raw version, just to start getting used to this right now. So this is Markdown.
John Ellis: Alright, so…
John Ellis: Let's go ahead and first start talking about the different types of levels of security and sensitivity of data
John Ellis: in data, and this is as defined as, by VUIT,
John Ellis: This is important because not all tools offer the same levels of assurance of security.
John Ellis: And this is the starting point. You want to keep this in mind.
John Ellis: So, Level 1 data is publicly available data. This could be press releases, educational materials, job postings. These are the things that you'd be pretty happy actually just posting online.
John Ellis: So, no security guarantee.
John Ellis: So, what AI tools are approved for Level 1? Well, all the tools that we have at Vanderbilt.
John Ellis: And this includes… Chatgpt EDU. How many people here have used ChatGPT EDU?
John Ellis: Okay, great, so this is actually available to everyone at Vanderbilt, not available for people at BUMC, I'm so sorry. But this is, meant to provide the chat interface to ChatGPT,
John Ellis: It does not provide the agentic capabilities, but it does provide the chat at sort of that pro level.
John Ellis: Amplify. How many people here have used Amplify?
John Ellis: Okay, great. So, many are familiar with Amplify. Here, this also gives you access not only to ChatGPT, but to many other models as well, including Claude.
John Ellis: and other models as well. It doesn't have access to Gemini right now, but it has access to nearly everything else. And Microsoft Copilot. How many people have had… used Microsoft Copilot? Okay, great. The Copilot is interesting.
John Ellis: Probably the lesser of all of the models, right now.
John Ellis: But, but they are coming along.
John Ellis: Any third-party tools would be fine here, too. For example, the tools we're going to be talking about, Claude, Claude Code, and Claude Co-Work, this level of data is fine.
John Ellis: I will point out something, though. If you use a free version of Claude or of any of these models, a free version where you yourself have signed up, and chatGPT is the one exception, because if you've… if you've opted in, you know, you're not paying, so it is free. University's paying for it.
John Ellis: But if you are using a purely free service.
John Ellis: Your data is going to be used to train the model.
John Ellis: Absolute.
John Ellis: So, if you are using the free version, your data is going to be used to train the model at some point. It's not going to be happening right away, but it's going to be stored and used in a later training of a later model.
John Ellis: If you pay… You still have to opt out of sharing your data.
John Ellis: So, if you pay, you have the option of opting out of sharing your data for training purposes, and I would suggest that you do so.
John Ellis: That's level one.
John Ellis: Level 2.
John Ellis: Internal use only. This is going to be, like, internal budgets, non-public contracts, internal policy, anything that, should not be shared with non-VU individuals without permission.
John Ellis: So, this isn't going to be, an existential threat if this were to get out, but this would be, unfortunate if this data were to be released.
John Ellis: email distributions list being one of those. The AI tools that are approved for Level 2 data are ChatGPTU, Amplify, Microsoft Copilot.
John Ellis: Notice that none of the other models are there. Claude, Claude Code, Claude Coworker. The things that we're going to be using are only
John Ellis: are only allowable for Level 1.
John Ellis: Now…
John Ellis: We can discuss with you ways of anonymizing data, and making it in so it is much more safe to use, and of setting up systems, and so you're not sharing any data, but you're doing all work locally. We'll talk about that.
John Ellis: Level 3 data, restricted.
John Ellis: So this is FERPA.
John Ellis: So, information about students, this is level 3. This could be personally identifiable information, this could be research health information. This is the broad range of research data that has to do with individuals. So, Amplify and Microsoft Copilot.
John Ellis: are approved for this.
John Ellis: Magic is also approved for this. Magic is also an agent that's built using much of the same infrastructure as Amplify. It is level 3. Notice what is missing here.
John Ellis: ChatGPTEDU.
John Ellis: ChatGPTEDU is for Level 2.
John Ellis: Unless… unless it's changed in the last few weeks, and the UIT folks, correct me if I'm wrong.
John Ellis: But, so, FERPA data does not belong in ChatGPT EDU.
John Ellis: We go up from here.
John Ellis: We go up to, level 4 critical, and this is… this is where you need to have the conversation with, with VUIT if you're going to be using this data.
John Ellis: We now, though, have other interesting options.
John Ellis: If you personally hold highly sensitive information.
John Ellis: and you want to use a competent AI program, your options just a year ago were pretty slim.
John Ellis: Now… We have other options.
John Ellis: So this is a Dell Pro Max GB10. This is actually, Grace Blackwell. So this is a very recent chip and very recent GPU combined onto a single, a single chip.
John Ellis: This has 128GB of shared memory, so it can actually run models that are pretty decently large.
John Ellis: just last week, it was a Chinese company released a company called… it's the Quinn series of models.
John Ellis: Quinn 3.5 midsize. I mention that in particular because that, in many ways, is the equivalent of Sonnet 4.5 in Cloud. That is a very competent frontier AI model that was state-of-the-art, 4 months ago.
John Ellis: So this means you can run something locally and extremely securely.
John Ellis: So long as you're set up correctly. So you've got to make sure that you're set up, and so this is set up correctly. Data Science Institute, we're happy to sort of help you out, think through what that might look like. But we've done very… work with very sensitive data on a device like this, where the model is not going to be as competent
John Ellis: as just using the full Opus 4.6, But it's not bad.
John Ellis: And you get much of the capabilities, and you can run local agents with local LLMs on device.
John Ellis: So there are options.
John Ellis: Let me pause here.
John Ellis: You've now seen what the different levels of security are.
John Ellis: And here we can… you can get, just a quick idea of what this… what this looks like.
John Ellis: And, and what's, what's allowed where.
John Ellis: What questions do you have about
John Ellis: The options here, and about security.
John Ellis: Yes? Jesse, in chat GPTEDU, do you have to opt out from data sharing as well, when it's on the band code? So, great question. So, on ChatGPTEDU, do you have to opt out of, sharing your data for training? I don't know. Is there anyone from VOIT who knows? Yes.
John Ellis: There's not an option to opt out necessarily, but by default, your data that you share with Chad UCP in the Vanderbilt workspace is not being shared with OpenAI to train their models. So the answer is, it is not being used to train… not being used to train their models, just by, by the agreement.
John Ellis: So you need not opt out of that. Great question. Other questions? Thank you.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: Are those what? Yeah, they keep you…
John Ellis: upgradable, like, you can upgrade the Sonnet to… Well, no, you can… so on here, you would not be able to run, Sonnet itself, for example, right? Because it's a private, closed source, but you can run other models,
John Ellis: And again, the strongest open source model right now is a Chinese model, the Quen 3.5 models. And yes, you can actually run, install, and run the models locally on this device.
John Ellis: So your data's going nowhere, and all the work's being done in here. Trade-off is…
John Ellis: And we're gonna see this in just a moment.
John Ellis: It's not as large of a large language model. It has less knowledge of the world.
John Ellis: And so you have to do more work to make sure that it is the equivalent for very specific types of tasks. But this is interesting. We now have agent capabilities with these models that before, just 6 months before, would have been
John Ellis: You couldn't pay for.
John Ellis: Tom should know this, but where does research data go? That's mine, it's not database. And so what's allowed, and what's…
John Ellis: recommended. So, the question is, you know, what about research data? Where does it go? So, there are data use agreements. If you have data use agreements, if you've generated it, your data.
John Ellis: Great conversation to have with VUIT, you know, if it's… because it all depends on the nature of the data. One of the things that I do suggest is having conversations with, with VUIT. They're very helpful in sort of figuring out what's happening.
John Ellis: Rule of thumb is, if you're unsure where the data is, if it's between two levels.
John Ellis: You can bias to be more conservative by assuming the highest level, and if that's inconvenient, then you talk to VUIT, and you say, okay, how can… is it actually the lower level, or how do I get it to the lower level?
John Ellis: But, yeah, but that's a really good question. I don't know.
John Ellis: Yes, please. I serve on the SBHR IRV. Get your…
John Ellis: You should be disclosing. It's not a thing, but if it's…
John Ellis: not protected. Yeah, assuming… assuming that it's… Data from monkeys. Data from monkeys, right. Yeah, yeah, that's important.
John Ellis: So, good… good to have conversations about… about the… about the data source of data.
John Ellis: Fantastic. Other questions? Yes, and then I'll take back your… yes.
John Ellis: if the data to chat GPT is not trained, right, it's not out, then…
John Ellis: How… like, why is it this need to put
John Ellis: Yeah, so the question is, if the data is not being trained on, what's the issue? Why not put, you know, why not put sensitive data there?
John Ellis: Because you are sending data off-premise onto another server, it's going someplace, they may not train on it, but it is sitting on their servers for a certain amount of time.
John Ellis: while you're inferencing on it, and so that means that it's not secure. So certainly for the most sensitive data, there's no guarantee it won't leak.
John Ellis: So imagine, the way that I try to think about it, would I be happy putting this into a Google Doc?
John Ellis: am I comfortable putting into a Google Doc? Right? That's sort of my first measure of, if I'm not comfortable, why? And how uncomfortable am I? Right? Because it can… we've had instances in the past where certainly the data is shared, especially if you go outside of the major providers.
John Ellis: I mean, the, so the Chinese companies do a beautiful job with open source models, but if you use their endpoints, yeesh, your data is absolutely going to be taken, it's absolutely gonna be… and many of those companies are not great with security, so that's what the concern is.
John Ellis: This is a comment for the general type of question about, is research data, well, data classification? Does it cost you? This is much complex
John Ellis: Probably the band. Hope you can find it.
John Ellis: We… so fully certain data like that, we will go back to the, data.
John Ellis: Today, thanks.
John Ellis: you as a data owner, how comfortable are you with the thing? It takes something a discussion with, cybersecurity and Privacy Office to see, do some analysis on your data, see that if there's
John Ellis: critical component or sensitive components about your data, but eventually go back to the data alerts expected. So I'm saying that because, I could have some internal data that is
John Ellis: by definition, by level 2, but to me, it's so critical. I want to guard that rescue to Level 4. I want to guard everything I have, and I can do that.
John Ellis: So we can think that firstly as well. Yeah. Our goal is to set up a baseline.
John Ellis: So let me go, and I'll… tell me if this is an alright summary. The issues raised by data are complex, and when I say talk with VOIT, this is not so VOIT can give you a judgment. This is a conversation you can have with them of how sensitive is the data to you? Where should it fall based on your expertise?
John Ellis: So, many different issues can come up, you know, is it re-identifiable? Do you have issues with composition, where, you…
John Ellis: In short, let me say, have a conversation with VUIT. They're experts in sort of judging where things are and what level it might be, in conversation with you, depending on your judgment.
John Ellis: I think this is a bigger discussion. It's a bigger discussion, yeah.
John Ellis: It's not just you, right.
John Ellis: what's allowed. Yes. Right? And folks want to know what their rules are, and they'll get consultation, but, you know, they don't want someone to feel like that. You can or can't do this.
John Ellis: Yeah. But it's not actually rules. So the… the concern is, like, you know, or the wanting to understand what the rules are, what the… No, and I think that the take-home… yeah, the best practice, exactly. So, take-home message is.
John Ellis: It is complex, that's fine. Having a conversation to actually figure out what the best practices are, what's secure and what's not, fantastic.
John Ellis: Yes, do you have… So this is more of a layperson type of question. I understand why it's important for you to secure your data.
John Ellis: But all of us, all of a sudden, stop sharing everything that we do. How do the models get better?
John Ellis: Well, and the question is, if we don't share what we're doing, how do the models get better? Interesting thing, right now, models are trained on the order of 20 trillion tokens. These are words or subwords, we're going to be talking about those in just a moment, as a matter of fact. There's an immense amount of data that the models are trained on right now.
John Ellis: And it turns out that much of the improvements of the models that we're seeing are not necessarily coming from massive training on new data.
John Ellis: It actually comes from training on the data, on more curated data, and training… following different practices and training on the data. So they're already trained on immense amounts of information. So what's the delta on our particular information? Small.
John Ellis: And it turns out that some of the most best… the most significant recent advancements have nothing to do with the data that it's training. Instead, it has to do with alignment of the models.
John Ellis: Turning them into reasoning models, and it has to do with the agent harness.
John Ellis: So we're going to be talking about that as well. So there are other ways to get vast improvements in the models that don't require additional data.
John Ellis: So, not, not…
John Ellis: Not an uninterested question, absolutely, but know that there are other ways of getting good model improvements without
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: Absolutely. Go ahead. So, I got a notification from Claude, the desktop version. They wanted to find all the devices on the network that we're getting data from. Are there any of the other models that are going to do that with desktop version? Oh, there are models that are going to do a lot more than that. So, we'll talk a little bit about, OpenClaw.
John Ellis: Which is, it's a different type of an agent, but we'll talk about that, yes. So, now you're not just talking about what data you're going to be sharing, but what capabilities you're going to give the agents. And these are questions you're going to have.
John Ellis: And we're gonna be… we're gonna be talking about exactly those, because that's the other side of the equation, is now what do you want the model to do? It couldn't do anything before.
John Ellis: Now, it can take actions on your behalf, and the question is, what are you going to allow it to do?
John Ellis: And there was a question over here, I believe, yes.
John Ellis: Those of us that are also at center point, are there going to be people we can chat with about how this whole infrastructure talks across those boundaries? We can chat over… so the question was about VUMC, and there are about 24 of you in the room. Let me begin by… with my apologies. So yes, it is very locked down at VUMC, which is understandable.
John Ellis: But this means that your options are more limited, especially when it comes to agents.
John Ellis: For research, this is…
John Ellis: I think a conversation and doing absolutely secure is one option. Not a bad option, and it's one that simply is just before.
John Ellis: That's also by heart.
John Ellis: So… So, I was gonna say that we can chat over coffee, but we might need to chat over…
John Ellis: a drink.
John Ellis: But seriously, these are conversations we can have and say, oh, they're… they're… they're… we have options. It's more like a desktop, so we're happy to chat over coffee.
John Ellis: All right. Other questions, then, about, about capabilities for AI at Vanderbilt, a little bit about Vanderbilt University Medical Center, or about sensitivities? Yes?
John Ellis: Yesterday, Magic told me it could format a Word document without writing a Python script. You were mentioning markdowns. Is there a reason a more advanced agent might not be able to do
John Ellis: what I think of as a simple task.
John Ellis: So, so the question was about Magic. Magic is an agent, and we'll be looking a little bit at it. The way that agents work, the ways that agents work, you're going to be seeing in just a moment, is they write code all the time.
John Ellis: And if you were working with PowerPoints or Docs or Excel, then, yeah, it has to do a little bit more work. It has to write code or call code in order to get to what it's trying to do. And the idea behind…
John Ellis: this, which is the markdown, is that it's immediately available. So that's… that's the main difference between the two. There are other file formats, too, that we'll… we'll talk about a bit, that can also make the job of the AI easier, just so you can actually make the data and the documents more easily available. It can work with anything. It can work with images of documents.
John Ellis: Absolutely. It's just a matter of the lift that's required to get there. So I should have asked to use Python, right? Yes, yeah, write the code. It's always going to write the code, that's how it's going to do things.
John Ellis: All right.
John Ellis: Final questions about, about, about these topics.
John Ellis: Alright, then… what I'd like to do is, Let me go back…
John Ellis: We're gonna start talking about, actually, how these models work.
John Ellis: Anybody know what this is?
John Ellis: Actually, you do, so what… what is this, Cheryl notes? It's how they work. This is… this is… this is the model. This is a transformer model. So what you're looking at here is actually…
John Ellis: The process and the rough architecture.
John Ellis: of what's called a decoder transformer. This is ChatGPT, and this is what's happening Under the hood.
John Ellis: So I'm going to need to have your buy-in for about… for the next hour, we're going to dive into how these models work.
John Ellis: By understanding how the models work, you'll actually have a much better handle on what are good decisions and bad decisions about how to use the models.
John Ellis: And you'll also understand some of the oddities about working with the models that might not have been understandable or clear before.
John Ellis: So, but first, I'm going to have to have your approval. Are we in to look at… to look at this and get into the technical for about an hour, so then we can get to the applications a little bit later? Okay. Show of hands, please.
John Ellis: Alright, anybody opposed?
John Ellis: Alright, motion carries, we're gonna dive in. Here we go!
John Ellis: Generative AI models are deep learning models.
John Ellis: So this means that actually what you're really looking at here, especially under here, is… A deep neural network.
John Ellis: This is different from just software, in that there's not code.
John Ellis: that runs, right? So this is different because there are not rules and software that's written in order to have the model do what it's going to be doing.
John Ellis: And it has to go through some steps that you might not actually count on.
John Ellis: So here, context. This is where you put in the chat. We're going to do chat first, then we're going to do agents a little bit closer to the end.
John Ellis: So, this can be anything.
John Ellis: Right? This is where you may… you might even upload a document here, but this is where you start the chat.
John Ellis: Funny thing about deep learning models, they can only deal with numbers. Ever.
John Ellis: So this means one of the very first things that has to happen is a token encoding. This is taking
John Ellis: The individual words and breaking them down.
John Ellis: into, breaking them down into parts. These are called tokens, these are words or subwords.
John Ellis: Why do you need to do that? You need to do that because you then need to put them into a token embedded.
John Ellis: Hmm.
John Ellis: Here's how to think about it.
John Ellis: Those of you who've heard me introduce this before, what's… what's sitting right here? What's the word or the concept right here?
John Ellis: It's king! Yes, exactly, it's king! And it's sitting here in space, and the other words around it are very much like king. What are some of the other words?
John Ellis: Royalty, absolutely.
John Ellis: Monarch? Love it.
John Ellis: President? Queen?
John Ellis: Leader? Absolutely. So all of those are somewhere nearby. This is a semantic space.
John Ellis: So, the locations have meanings.
John Ellis: And the tokens, the first guess of what they are, land exactly there. So, why do I call them embeddings, and why do I represent them like this? Because it's their location in the space, it's a vector.
John Ellis: Just like in here, I could say I'm about 2 meters up.
John Ellis: I'm about 6 meters from the wall, and let's see, from the back wall, and I'm about, what, 10 meters from the side wall. That's…
John Ellis: That's… those are my coordinates.
John Ellis: But here, when we're talking about this embedding space, we're talking about thousands, perhaps thousands of dimensions, so enormous dimensionality.
John Ellis: and the locations have meaning. The interesting thing is.
John Ellis: You can do math in this space.
John Ellis: So let's take King, I'm gonna take man… man sitting over here. I'm gonna take king, subtract man.
John Ellis: Where am I now?
John Ellis: Right.
John Ellis: Part Queen. Anybody disagree?
John Ellis: Have I added woman yet?
John Ellis: Oh, so King Minus Man is… y'all gave me some good words before.
John Ellis: Ruler, royalty, crown, right? That is the ungendered king, right? Now let's add woman.
John Ellis: Now, where am I?
John Ellis: Now I'm a queen, absolutely. So you can do math, you can average, what's, what's on the average between king and queen?
John Ellis: These models, deep learning models, can do math on this in a useful way.
John Ellis: So at this level, what we're going to say is, they turned into embeddings, magic happens… Yes, we will get more details.
John Ellis: And then, we get token probabilities.
John Ellis: So remember, instead of talking about words, we're talking about tokens, right? So…
John Ellis: Tokens are words or subwords. This is sort of a vocabulary that you decide on before you get started. Once you decide on your token vocabulary, you're stuck with it, so you can't change afterwards. It's not necessarily learned, this is just a decision that you make. That cat is going to be 42.
John Ellis: Dog is going to be 63. You actually decide this, and you try to make it, and so you can represent as many common words and concepts with single tokens, but sometimes you have to go to multiple tokens for a word, because you can't put a token on every single word, and misspelling.
John Ellis: So, it's gonna be words or something.
John Ellis: So what happens at this point is the model, and this is all that the model does.
John Ellis: Is produce a probability distribution over the next token.
John Ellis: So what is most likely going to come at this point?
John Ellis: And then, what happens is…
John Ellis: Actually, you add a little bit of noise here. You don't choose, maybe, the most
John Ellis: The most likely word, most probable word.
John Ellis: You had a little bit of noise, and you're gonna see why in a moment, and then you make the next word prediction, and then you have one word.
John Ellis: But this is at odds with our experience, isn't it?
John Ellis: Because we don't never… we never get just single-word responses from the models. What do you suppose is happening?
John Ellis: Multiple predictions? Oh, wait… now you said multiple predictions, but you did something with your hand. What did you do? You went like this. What does that mean?
John Ellis: My next.
John Ellis: You take the word that you chose, you put it back in the context, and you rerun.
John Ellis: When models are responding to you, this is called autoregressive, the models are walking.
John Ellis: a response. I choose this word, I choose the next, I choose this word.
John Ellis: of autoregressive, and the models are generating a longer response by actually choosing words in turn. How do you know when the model… how do you suppose the model knows when to stop?
John Ellis: It could keep on producing words, Same.
John Ellis: Oh, it could be the same words, could be.
John Ellis: How about predicts a period.
John Ellis: Matter of fact, there's a special token called End of sequence.
John Ellis: When it produces end of sequence, it says, I'm done.
John Ellis: And then stops.
John Ellis: This underlying technology has not changed since these models were first introduced to the wider public by Google in 2017 in a paper called Intention is All You Need. 2017, things have not changed. This is the architecture. Let's go a little bit more into the innards of the architecture.
John Ellis: So here we go.
John Ellis: And… and here you're gonna pick up some, some, some additional words.
John Ellis: Two things happen in the decoder stack.
John Ellis: One is… Words that come before the current word influence the current word.
John Ellis: I'll give you an example.
John Ellis: She looked across the board and said, triumphantly, King.
John Ellis: Am I in the right place?
John Ellis: It's the word king, but it's at the right location. She looked across the board and said triumphantly, King Me.
John Ellis: Is that even a… a noun?
John Ellis: The use?
John Ellis: It's a verb, right? Okay, so I'm in totally the wrong place. How do I know this? Because of the words that came before. I'm talking about
John Ellis: First of all, it's playing the role of a verb rather than a noun.
John Ellis: What are we talking about here?
John Ellis: like a game, because it's board, and she said it triumphantly, so it's something… so it's something like that. I need to be closer to where the board is, right? I need to be closer to where the verb-like things are. How do I know that, and how do I get there? Because I take the words that came before, and it moves me by averaging.
John Ellis: I average some of the meaning from board.
John Ellis: And from triumphantly, and from the use of this as a verb to move where my representation is of king. I move my embedding.
John Ellis: That's one part. Now comes the knowledge part.
John Ellis: What has the word king and has to do with winning and a board?
John Ellis: Could be chess?
John Ellis: Checkers. Checkers!
John Ellis: Attention is the averaging of the information to get you in about the right place. MLP, this is called the multi-layer perceptron, a wonderful 50-cent word. Multilayer perceptron. This actually makes contact with the fact that we've been talking about these things really since the 70s and 80s. The technology is not new.
John Ellis: the algorithms are better, and there are a lot more MLPs than we had before, but this is where the knowledge is stored. It's not a database.
John Ellis: They're not doing a lookup to see where this is. Instead, this has to do with your location in the space, and it informs and moves you further. It enriches the meaning.
John Ellis: So you take the location where you are, so first of all, location is wrong place, attention puts it into more of the right place, then the MLT further informs and modifies that embedding, and so it moves it again. Now it puts it much closer to gaming.
John Ellis: And to board games, and to checkers.
John Ellis: That's one stack. Then we do it again.
John Ellis: Then we do it again.
John Ellis: Let me do it again.
John Ellis: The understanding and the representation improving each time as you go from stack to stack, and then you finally get to the point where you're going to make that probability, and you're gonna guess the next word. She looked across the board and said triumphantly.
John Ellis: Me.
John Ellis: And how do you know that? Because you're playing a game, you're winning, and when you say that in checkers, that means you expect to have another piece of your color put on top of your piece.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: So, let's talk about large language models.
John Ellis: That's a decoder transformer that is actually You're looking at ChatGPT?
John Ellis: But we keep on talking about large language models.
John Ellis: Well, here's a large…
John Ellis: language model. When we say large, we mean, quite literally, that the MLPs, the multi-layer perceptrons, are larger and can store more information.
John Ellis: Representationally, this is not a database, this is not a data store like this. This is storing the ish.
John Ellis: of the world.
John Ellis: How many of you remember JPEGs?
John Ellis: So remember, actually, the original digital cameras, remember this, actually could only ever take JPEGs, and they were always, like, fuzzy?
John Ellis: But it was kind of cool. And even still, now, you might get images from somebody and say, can you resend this? This is… this is fuzzy.
John Ellis: very fuzzy, less fuzzy.
John Ellis: MLPs are a fuzzy JPEG of the world.
John Ellis: If it has more space, Then it can do a better job of representing what's there.
John Ellis: Large language models, in addition to giving you more stacks, bigger attention.
John Ellis: Really grows because you have more and more multilayer perceptrons.
John Ellis: You know, bigger, wider, and it can represent and learn more about the world.
John Ellis: So, what are the differences between a large language model that cannot run, On one of these?
John Ellis: And a small language model which could run on one of these, or even on your laptop?
John Ellis: Well, one way is the world knowledge. It's gonna have less world knowledge, because it's gonna be like this.
John Ellis: Architecturally, it's going to be the same. It's going to have some less capabilities as well, because it's going to have fewer layers, but it's going to have the same type of capabilities. They're the same, but they tend to actually have fewer parameters.
John Ellis: Let me pause here. What questions do you have, based on your new understanding of transformer models, that's the underlying model.
John Ellis: and, generative AI.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: Explain how difficult it is not made a special place. Sure.
John Ellis: So how MLP is not database-driven. When you actually look at this, when you look at what a multi-layer perceptron is.
John Ellis: Happens. Would you actually like to see the formal pseudocode?
John Ellis: For a transformer?
John Ellis: You want to see the real deal? I tend not to do this because it scares people.
John Ellis: But we're gonna do it.
John Ellis: Lovely.
John Ellis: Algorithm 10 of the Formal Algorithms for Transformers paper, you are looking at ChatGPT.
John Ellis: This is all of it.
John Ellis: This is it.
John Ellis: So when I say that there's not actually code there, that's what I mean. Instead, that knowledge that we're talking about, that knowledge of the world, is in line 8, right here.
John Ellis: This, I'll scroll that up so you can see it.
John Ellis: Line 8.
John Ellis: We can make it bigger.
John Ellis: This is a dense two-layer.
John Ellis: Feet forward?
John Ellis: network.
John Ellis: The knowledge is stored here.
John Ellis: In these weight matrices, So, there are no words there.
John Ellis: There's no specific data there. It is represented there. The models can learn representations, but there's no data to look up.
John Ellis: It is doing the math, And returning an enrichment of the tokens.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: Bye.
John Ellis: What… what is different between… Like, the more…
John Ellis: data you put into it, like, it scales, like, what, how is it? Well, yeah, we had deep learning models since, like, the… you know, we had artificial neural nets since the 70s. We've had
John Ellis: you know, neural, you know, full-on neural nets since the 80s. We had, you know, you know, in the 2000s, we had really good, deep neural nets. Why did we not have ChatGPT?
John Ellis: Attention.
John Ellis: and attention used in this way. It turns out that the architecture, and it's going to be a little bit easier to see this back here, this architecture turned out to be THE key.
John Ellis: By putting together these same elements that we had for a while, in a new way.
John Ellis: We finally have the capability of a model that was of pretty good, pretty darn good, Learner.
John Ellis: So that was part of it.
John Ellis: We needed to have the algorithm where we could have a good learner. Second, we needed to have compute.
John Ellis: Where you could actually train these, because training the models is much more expensive and much harder than inferencing.
John Ellis: You just saw the algorithm, that's just straightforward math, but to train it, there's a lot more math that has to go on for it to even begin to learn.
John Ellis: And we'll go through an example of one training example in just a moment.
John Ellis: But we didn't have the compute that could actually do this at this scale at all.
John Ellis: You know, compute like this.
John Ellis: Well, to give you an idea, I want you to just go visit the, the Frontier, supercomputer down the road at Oak Ridge National Laboratory.
John Ellis: And they have these large stacks, right, of these machines.
John Ellis: And the machine is not that old. One of those huge racks that draws 128 kilowatts of power
John Ellis: It's less powerful than this.
John Ellis: So we've come a long way, and so now we have the compute, finally, that we need to be able to do this. The final thing is, we changed the way that we changed the models.
John Ellis: We changed the way that we train the models, and here's an important part, and if you've heard me talk before, then,
John Ellis: Oh, wait a minute, actually, maybe it's not there.
John Ellis: Yes, okay, great.
John Ellis: So I'm gonna flash… I'm gonna flash this, sentence in front of you.
John Ellis: those of you who've been to run into the trainings like, I gotta change the sentence, but I just love Zora Niel Hurston, so I hate changing the example. But if you've done this before, don't answer.
John Ellis: Here's the task, and this was the task that we used to train the models.
John Ellis: Guess the next verb.
John Ellis: Guess the next token?
John Ellis: So I'm going to flash this, and…
John Ellis: I would very much like for you to respond very quickly, okay? Give me an answer, and bad answers are so much more useful than good answers. So if you think you have a bad answer, thank you, please say it out loud, okay? Agreement? Are we good?
John Ellis: I'm gonna flash this, guess the next word.
John Ellis: And I'm probing your deep neural net, so give me the… the thing just pops into your head.
John Ellis: Ships at a distance have every man's wish on.
John Ellis: Alright, so I heard star…
John Ellis: We have some good writers in here, I'm not gonna say the word that you're saying. So…
John Ellis: I heard shore… star… Now you're… okay, so now, okay.
John Ellis: Everything that you just said… is a noun. How'd you know that it should be a noun?
John Ellis: Alright, you have to think about it for a moment. If somebody's a grammarian here, they're gonna say, well… Preposition. There we go, it's going to be the object by the prepositional phrase. That's not really why, though, right? That's kind of like, we use that as the explanation of why we did the thing we did, but it has to… it's serving this purpose. We know that because
John Ellis: of the previous context. We've got to learn how to use this previous context to know that it's got to be a noun-like thing. Second, every noun that you chose had something to do with some information in the sentence, the semantics.
John Ellis: So, either with being far away, you know, ashore, wishing on a star, you know, on the deck, on board, all these things have to do with the semantics here. So, in other words, in order to even get closer, you've got to know the semantics of what's going on here. You've got to learn the semantics.
John Ellis: Finally, Which is better, on shore?
John Ellis: on… On, on, on Horizon, On deck or on board?
John Ellis: Or…
John Ellis: on board. Why? Okay, so which part of the sentence do I have to pay attention to, to get to that?
John Ellis: on board. Ships. So, ships is going to be really important here. I've got to learn, I need to attend to pay attention to ship.
John Ellis: And borrow from the semantics of that to shape what comes here. And indeed, yes, ships on the horizon have every man's wish on board.
John Ellis: Okay, final one. I heard on deck and on board, which is better?
John Ellis: Every man's, ships at a distance have every man's wish on deck. Ships at a distance have every man's wish on board.
John Ellis: Bored is prettier. Bored is prettier!
John Ellis: Bored is… is… is more… poetic.
John Ellis: On deck is concrete, so in addition to even get the right, right word, we have to know about those different styles of writing.
John Ellis: maybe know a little bit about Zora Neale Hurston. I know that she made commentary, right? She was an anthropologist. She's not… she's making broad commentary here, so yes, it's on board.
John Ellis: Great. Those are all the things you can learn, or have to learn, in order to get that word right.
John Ellis: This is called self-supervised learning. This is how the models are trained.
John Ellis: It has to learn about everything that's carried, all the information which is carried, in order to learn how to
John Ellis: guess that next word. Where does that information go? That information goes into Right in here.
John Ellis: Into the multi-layer perceptrons.
John Ellis: Again, these are not facts. This is not… Zora Neale Hurston's first line of her novel, Their Eyes Were Watching God, is the following.
John Ellis: It's…
John Ellis: hey, when words are like this, ships have things that are… they have decks, they also… you can say there's a phrase on board, it's more metaphorical, here's the meanings of… of all the different words that are here. When they're put together in this way, attend to this part, not this part.
John Ellis: Then do the math.
John Ellis: And make the prediction.
John Ellis: This is why the models
John Ellis: don't necessarily have the specifics, but they know generally what's correct. Was there a question over here? But it's both, because you can reproduce long segments of tactically probably… Oh, yeah, if your MLP is big enough, right?
John Ellis: Yeah. You can get… if you train enough on it, yeah, if you train enough, you can, but there's not enough room to store everything. So it has to do with the frequency with which you train.
John Ellis: And how well you trained on it, but that's not going to happen with everything that you put in.
John Ellis: So what that indicates is that they trained a lot on that text, which they probably did not know, right?
John Ellis: They trained a lot on it, because it was high quality. So they trained on it multiple times, which means
John Ellis: It was stored here and stored so strongly that it
John Ellis: was drawn to do it, so this is the sharp part of the fuzzy JPEG.
John Ellis: All right, so… Oh, yeah, go ahead. When you say store, that means store W.
John Ellis: Yes, it's stored in… it's stored in the parameters.
John Ellis: There's no text, it's all learned in the parameters. Now, we're talking about immense numbers. We're talking about anywhere on the order, for the larger models, 500 billion different numbers.
John Ellis: To a trillion different numbers.
John Ellis: Extremely large.
John Ellis: But let's think about what you trained on.
John Ellis: You trained on text from the internet.
John Ellis: Among other things.
John Ellis: You ever run across anything on the internet that was…
John Ellis: Wrong. Wrong. So that's all there, and the model learns and represents that information here.
John Ellis: So this is not something that you can simply extract or correct, it's sitting there.
John Ellis: Models can be aligned, and so they respond more safely, more appropriately. Absent that, it is going to be just based on what they were trained on. There is no code there to change.
John Ellis: It is simply what they're trained. So, and also, even if they're aligned to respond in a different way, no, that is still there.
John Ellis: It is a mirror held up to ourselves.
John Ellis: And everything…
John Ellis: Which we have written and created, it's probably trained on, so all that stuff is there. And that's important to keep in mind with the models.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: So… Like, I have tried better, just, I guess, when they got better at being different to you.
John Ellis: what's correct? What's incorrect? Like, where… where does that… So here's…
John Ellis: let me answer right there, because that was just perfect. So…
John Ellis: It is always producing something which has a high probability, which is plausible.
John Ellis: So, and I've just said.
John Ellis: that unless you add something else here, it only has the fuzzy JPEG of the world.
John Ellis: So when people say that the models are problematic because they hallucinate, The bad news is.
John Ellis: That's all it ever does.
John Ellis: It is always and only hallucinate.
John Ellis: Now, you can kind of make the point that it's not too different from actually how we do it.
John Ellis: But absent additional tooling.
John Ellis: it's not… it's going to give you something which is positive, and the more that you push it for things that it's not heavily trained on, if it's been trained on a particular book for a long time, it might be able to get very, very precise.
John Ellis: A great example, though, is when you take a model that has no other tools, and you say, hey, can you find me a reference?
John Ellis: And then it gives you…
John Ellis: an author that's about a right. It gives you the title, which is about right, the journal is about right, and it has plausible-sounding issue numbers and everything, and you're joyful, because it's exactly what you needed. It fit… it…
John Ellis: It fit exactly with what you asked it about.
John Ellis: And then it produced something which was very probable.
John Ellis: And then you're shocked, because it doesn't actually exist.
John Ellis: So this is the problem. It's not that it is all of a sudden it's hallucinating, it's that it has no additional information.
John Ellis: So where can that additional information come from so it can do a better job?
John Ellis: These can only get so big.
John Ellis: And frankly, if you… you only train at specific times because it's expensive to do.
John Ellis: Takes a lot of power.
John Ellis: Takes water to train.
John Ellis: Not so much when you're inferencing, but definitely when you're training. It takes those resources, and when you train, you also run the risk of forgetting other things. So the answer is not just train it more.
John Ellis: Well, an interesting thing has happened over the last couple of years. These context windows have gotten longer.
John Ellis: So now you have in Claude, for example, 200,000. In Gemini, and also in Claude, now you have a million tokens. This is multiple big book chapters. This is multiple papers, this is huge amounts of text, and remember what we talked about? Attention?
John Ellis: If the information exists here, attention can draw from it and give you a much better answer.
John Ellis: So, if you know the answer to the following, please, please don't say it, but
John Ellis: First of all, I'll say, how many people watched the Super Bowl?
John Ellis: So I'm originally from Seattle, it was kind of thrilling to see, I'm sorry for whatever the other team was. But,
John Ellis: What?
John Ellis: And if you know the answer to this, don't say it. What's the… what's the capital of the state of Washington?
John Ellis: You know what you want to say.
John Ellis: You're gonna say, it's like, Seattle, that's the best you got. All right, please do the following. If you don't know the answer, pull out your phone.
John Ellis: Seriously, follow your phone… Google it!
John Ellis: Nope.
John Ellis: Did you know?
John Ellis: I didn't have any, I agree.
John Ellis: All right, I'm gonna ask you… who here has gotten the answer?
John Ellis: Anybody? Okay, great. What is the capital of the state of Washington?
John Ellis: Olympia.
John Ellis: And you know that because you looked it up. And I didn't have to tell you exactly how to do it, I said, look it up.
John Ellis: Well, what if we gave the models the ability to look it up?
John Ellis: The model can know when it's being asked something precise.
John Ellis: And then actually just make the call to look it up, put it into the context window.
John Ellis: So now the context window looks like, just like it was for you.
John Ellis: what's the… what's the capital of the state of Washington?
John Ellis: And then you said, looking up on phone.
John Ellis: Google says Olympia, and then you respond.
John Ellis: Olympia is the capital of the state of Washington.
John Ellis: So the models, when augmented by tools, have the ability to do a much better job. If the model is not augmented by tools, you ought not to be using it like
John Ellis: Google.
John Ellis: Because you're going to get the fuzzy JPEG answer.
John Ellis: You're gonna get, sort of, the learned knowledge here, which may or may not be correct.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: you make transformers relatively intuitive, and yet I understand the magic in the black box is something we still don't understand. So with mechanistic interpretability, what are we still trying to figure out? Okay, so…
John Ellis: And the question here is, in particular, around understanding what's happening, because a lot of this is buried. We're going to be talking about agent skills in just a little bit, and that's going to be one way to actually get more insight into what's happening with the models. But truthfully, what's happening with the models here is not happening at the weights level.
John Ellis: If, if we… if we take a look at,
John Ellis: Oh, actually, the, oh, I have it right here.
John Ellis: We take a look at here.
John Ellis: really what's happening here is, is right here. These are called the activations.
John Ellis: Right? We… to understand what's happening with the models, it's not going to be in what's stored in the weights, because,
John Ellis: Because the weights store lots of different information. Each number can actually inform the meaning of many different things. It's like a palimpsest. Writing on writing on writing.
John Ellis: So you're not going to be able to look at the weights to tell what's going on. Instead, you have to look at what the model… what the activations are.
John Ellis: we're actually going to be starting up a generative AI graduate certificate.
John Ellis: If you want to really get into this, you can do that. It's going to be, should be part of the employee tuition program, so do that if you want to really, really deep, go deep dive into this. But the issue here is you need to analyze these. There are many more numbers here than there are weights.
John Ellis: It gets even larger. And there's an approach, mathematical approach, to actually look at what those activations mean, to get an idea of what the model is representing, and how it is actually solving the problems it's solving. Very early days for this, though, still.
John Ellis: But at least it gives us some insight into that black box.
John Ellis: Other questions?
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: So when people talk about, like, That post-training or fine-tuning? Yes.
John Ellis: So… Everything that we talked about in terms of Guessing the word, board.
John Ellis: is pre-training. This is where the model learns language, learns semantic, learns facts, learns about the world. Alignment comes after that.
John Ellis: Alignment is sometimes in the same kind of way where it's guessing the next word, but sometimes can be something which is called reinforcement learning.
John Ellis: And this is more… shapes how the model should be responding.
John Ellis: Models that have no post-training are very blunt.
John Ellis: Right? They give you the answer, and that's it. They don't say hello, they don't, you know, put it into a full sentence, no need to, it's just guessing the next word.
John Ellis: It doesn't even know when you're asking a question.
John Ellis: So if you ask a question like.
John Ellis: what is the capital of the state of Washington, the model may very well say.
John Ellis: Because I'm interested in rainy weather, and I want to know, you know.
John Ellis: it will continue your question, because it doesn't know. So alignment, post-alignment, can first call.
John Ellis: Through additional training, teach it, About questions and about tasks.
John Ellis: Reinforcement learning can teach it about safe responses versus unsafe responses, can teach it about appropriate responses,
John Ellis: You know, sometimes it can, it can, trendy to be more helpful.
John Ellis: That is alignment. That is shaping what the model does.
John Ellis: Transformers were around for a long time, for years before ChatGPT hit. ChatGPT was… trained it on, on understanding queries.
John Ellis: and aligned it to chat, rather than just giving answers. And when those two things came together, we all of a sudden understood how to interact with it, and that opened the doors.
John Ellis: Other questions?
John Ellis: Then let's talk about tooling.
John Ellis: Actually, let's talk about something else first.
John Ellis: How many people
John Ellis: have either been in a class, or taught a class, where you have an extremely eager student who is ready to answer.
John Ellis: And you ask a question, and before you get to the end of the question, you know, they're ready to go, right?
John Ellis: In your opinion, are these the most considered Answers?
John Ellis: No, no, right? I mean, it's gonna be an answer, but it's gonna be… they're snapping it out, it's…
John Ellis: you know.
John Ellis: So… Models up until the point where
John Ellis: Models up until the point where, where we changed some of their Post-training, answered only like that.
John Ellis: They only ever immediately spat out that first prediction in answer to your question.
John Ellis: Models, base models, up until about a year ago, were this.
John Ellis: Then what we got, though, was reasoning models.
John Ellis: Here's how it works.
John Ellis: When someone asks you a really tough question, just to personify just first a little bit.
John Ellis: Do you immediately respond, or do you sort of have an internal monologue
John Ellis: First, especially if it's a tough question, one that requires thought.
John Ellis: So, alright, I've been asked about
John Ellis: the future of AI and what's going to be happening next. Well, what have we talked about already? What do I know about it? Was there something I've been thinking about recently about cool things that are going to be happening? How should I respond?
John Ellis: okay, I know this, oh, and I did read this article.
John Ellis: This is what I'm gonna go with.
John Ellis: Now I respond.
John Ellis: the internal model.
John Ellis: Thinking models, reasoning models, have that internal monologue. And they produce what's called a thinking token.
John Ellis: The thinking token puts it into a mode where it's not necessarily showing you what it's thinking, although sometimes you can click and see what it's doing.
John Ellis: The thinking token is the AI equivalent of the hand.
John Ellis: Hold on.
John Ellis: All right, so now what do they ask?
John Ellis: They asked me this, let me think about the knowledge that I have, let me go through this answer, I could make this response, or this response, that response is terrible, this is probably the best response.
John Ellis: And then answer.
John Ellis: The reasoning token, the thinking token, is meant to put the model into a mode where it has been aligned to actually reason in a very basic kind of way. In a way that I call McReasoning.
John Ellis: It's like, it's basic, it's not that advanced, but it often gets the job done, and then when it's ready, it has an end-thinking token, and then begins to respond. That's a reasoning model. Most models nowadays actually can do both.
John Ellis: You can interact with it. It used to be you had to choose the model that was the reasoning model versus the non-reasoning. Now, many models can flexibly go between the two.
John Ellis: And based on what you're asking, if it has not much of an idea of how to respond, it'll enter into thinking mode first. All that's happening is…
John Ellis: It's taking what it thought, And putting it into context.
John Ellis: So a lot of this is about getting better and better context.
John Ellis: And it turns out this is the way to understand not only reasoning models, but even agents as well.
John Ellis: It's all about putting into context that crucial information that, when applied to attention.
John Ellis: Can actually do the thing that you need it to do.
John Ellis: Let's talk about tools.
John Ellis: Tools are… Just like we talked about, Tools are…
John Ellis: The model being able to produce special.
John Ellis: Text, which gets picked up by a framework.
John Ellis: to do certain things. So it can actually make a call out to do a Google search. So it can say, hey, do a Google search. That gets picked up. Outside of the system, the Google search is carried out, and then the result is put back in.
John Ellis: I've been asked about the… I've been asked about, you know, the…
John Ellis: capital of the state of Washington. I'm gonna say Seattle, but I'm gonna do a Google search.
John Ellis: The capital of the state of Washington is Olympia.
John Ellis: Now I have a different answer.
John Ellis: And I'm going to respond differently because I've enriched my own context. Math!
John Ellis: That's a funny one.
John Ellis: People often get confused because they think the models are running on computers, and they only run on numbers, that they're going to be really good at math.
John Ellis: But do you remember the strawberry, how many R's in strawberry? And it was like, man, these bottles are no good, because I can't count the number of R's. Well…
John Ellis: First of all, tokens.
John Ellis: So, strawberry could be a single token.
John Ellis: So now it has to process that a very different way. And even counting.
John Ellis: 412.
John Ellis: Do you see the… do you see the number 12 around a lot?
John Ellis: I see it all over, like, a dozen, dozen… I see 12 all the time, right? Let's go and give that a token number of 93.
John Ellis: 12 is the token 93. 4, I see 4 a lot, too. Let's go and give that one the token number of 82.
John Ellis: Oh, you're asking me what 412 plus 1 is?
John Ellis: Alright, what concept am I near?
John Ellis: when I say, the token embedding for 4, or the token embedding of 12,
John Ellis: Now, I've got to combine the concepts and mend those, because I only represent those vectors, that's all I'm doing.
John Ellis: And now I'm going to depend on, have I seen someplace in my training data enough times a 412 plus 1 for me to get that right?
John Ellis: That's how the model does it if it has no access to tools. That's a nearly impossible task.
John Ellis: So what do you do?
John Ellis: Call a calculator.
John Ellis: You're asking about math, go ahead and call a calculator. You don't have a calculator, write some computer code. Have it run the computer code.
John Ellis: print 412 plus 1, it goes in the context, it now knows what the answer is, and then can respond.
John Ellis: Think about how different this is from us.
John Ellis: This is a very different kind of intelligence.
John Ellis: And this is kind of a challenge that we never thought that we would see.
John Ellis: One other thing that I'll mention before we start getting into tying this all together into agents is…
John Ellis: We talked about having 200,000 tokens here, a million tokens, so lots of space here, so… and we can populate it in a good way to get better answers
John Ellis: What's our working memory?
John Ellis: How many concepts can we hold in our mind?
John Ellis: At once.
John Ellis: And sort of hold them all, and compare them all.
John Ellis: Anybody know how many?
John Ellis: Depends on me. Like, 7, plus or minus 2, that's George Miller, and then later, actually, closer to, like, Simon, like, closer to 4, you know, so very small, but we are extremely limited in our attention.
John Ellis: The processes that we use to consider and to harness and to reason about vast amounts of information
John Ellis: our heuristics, chunking… Very different kinds of processes. Here, all that there is!
John Ellis: Is the context And the token encodings. And then the token embeddings, that's all.
John Ellis: Think of this intelligence as sort of crystalline.
John Ellis: Right?
John Ellis: You add, you recalculate, and you get a new version.
John Ellis: Us were always dynamic, so we thought that intelligence would have to be something that would be dynamic.
John Ellis: I'm a cognitive psychologist. I do mathematical… I did mathematical psychology, and I always thought that it was going to look very different than it is now. So this is one of the reasons why, when we work with AIs, we need to think about it in these terms.
John Ellis: It does not page anthropomorphize.
John Ellis: It's different.
John Ellis: It is a different type of intelligence than we are used to.
John Ellis: The key point For us right now is…
John Ellis: You can make tool calls.
John Ellis: And we want to make sure that useful things get put into context.
John Ellis: And it doesn't matter if you're talking about text, or if you're talking about images, all of those can be tokenized. All of those can be represented as embeddings, so it's multimodal, depending on whether you trained it on the multimodal to begin with.
John Ellis: The key thing is… tools.
John Ellis: What kind of tools do we have? We have internet search, We have skills.
John Ellis: We're gonna talk about those in just a moment. We have computer interaction.
John Ellis: So, it can write code, and run code in a special place.
John Ellis: to actually calculate what the answer is, and to populate the context. It can do MCP, that stands for Model Context Protocol.
John Ellis: That's an easy way that, that, for models to ask for
John Ellis: data or for processing to be done by an external source, rather than have to write a custom API, which is a protocol to actually ask for things a particular way, you can ask in more plain language, hey, can you look up this person's name for me? Here are my credentials. But look up the name, you figure out how to do it.
John Ellis: That's Model Context Protocol. Works across models.
John Ellis: other tools. RAG, this is now older?
John Ellis: If you have questions about RAG, we can talk about that, and why we tend not to use it as much anymore.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: So that's tools. So what's an agent?
John Ellis: I'll come back to skills in a moment.
John Ellis: an agent… is, model.
John Ellis: plus tools.
John Ellis: plus a loop, And some autonomy.
John Ellis: It's really high-end.
John Ellis: So we pose a problem.
John Ellis: And we ask the model to go after a problem, and we allow it to go through
John Ellis: And to actually run the tools, and to assess, maybe write the code, it's often writing code.
John Ellis: And then to come back and actually only report back when it is ready.
John Ellis: So this is not a single run, it could actually be done and emit the
John Ellis: End of… end of sequence token.
John Ellis: Right? But it's actually running code over here, sometimes asynchronously. Sometimes it can have multiple agents that are running at the same time, to come back and then produce for us something.
John Ellis: Tools plus autonomy gives you an agent.
John Ellis: Questions before I start going on to, onto skills, which do play into this?
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: Thought a little bit prior.
John Ellis: But how we can…
John Ellis: So nothing else here, so the question was about context and what's happening here. Nothing else here changes. It's the same architecture, it is what we call the agent harness around it.
John Ellis: So now, this model can actually write a file.
John Ellis: So let's say you're asking it to consider something, and it's a big, long problem. It might make itself a task list.
John Ellis: Matter of fact, you may actually have some guidance in there saying, hey, if somebody asks you to do a big task, make a task list first. Go into thinking mode.
John Ellis: Consider the task at hand. Make some external files so you don't have to try to keep track of everything in context.
John Ellis: And always return to the task list. When you're done, when you think you're done, return to the task list, make sure that it's all completed. If not, then pick up the next task.
John Ellis: That's the hardest. That's outside of this. That's stuff that you can kind of do if you're doing ChatGPT, but it's effortful.
John Ellis: You did this, now do the following, copy, paste, copy, paste. Now, that is more automated.
John Ellis: Other questions?
John Ellis: Yes. We're comparing for a damage.
John Ellis: There's just thinking, and those pro have access to more 2.7.
John Ellis: So what, what, what, what, what tools does ChatGPT Pro or ChatGPT EDU have? Quite, quite a few tools.
John Ellis: And sometimes you have to turn them on, but it does have computer interaction, it can have its own little, you know, place to write code. Kind of interesting thing, though, right? You don't get to say what libraries are loaded up there, or anything like that, or you can't load anything there, so it's only for its own personal use.
John Ellis: It turns out everybody has adopted skills, and I'll introduce those in a moment. So it has… you almost have to look to see what it has available. So the real caution is, if you use a model, if it has no tools.
John Ellis: that should severely restrict how you think about what it's going to be doing. It's going to be doing a lot more plausible answers than actually approval. Nice thing about these kinds of, like, computer… if it writes computer code, now you have traceability.
John Ellis: Right? Now you can actually go and assess what it did and how it solved it.
John Ellis: Now we start having more confidence in what it's doing, because we can actually inspect and watch what it's doing.
John Ellis: Other questions, yes?
John Ellis: Comment on this feature in the main tools, chat GPT Cloud Complexity. It offers deep research.
John Ellis: Yes. Yep.
John Ellis: Why is that there?
John Ellis: No, absolutely, and we're going to be talking a little bit more in depth about this a little bit later, too, but I'm happy to talk about it now. Think about this. If you…
John Ellis: If you want to have some real,
John Ellis: I'm trying to describe this without using the word deep research. If you want to go and you want to do a substantial dive into a particular topic, right?
John Ellis: You're gonna want to have something which is going to go in a very tight loop, and look at things, and try to…
John Ellis: Get the broad span of what's happening, find resources from reputable sources, and actually go through
John Ellis: lasso all that information, and then present it to you in a usable, actionable form. That's deep research. It is a very particular agent.
John Ellis: On a very tight agentic loop.
John Ellis: Which is going after a particular problem that you have phrased. So in there is going to be a special hidden prompt that you're not going to see.
John Ellis: It is absolutely going to have very advanced search.
John Ellis: And it's gonna be a line, and actually have instructions to do very particular types of search.
John Ellis: So that, that, in essence of deep research, different groups do, different, companies do this in different ways, but it is an agent. It's… matter of fact, it was one of the first agents that we had.
John Ellis: With a specialized model that did dense, very tight-looped work.
John Ellis: Because think of it, this is what you do, right? If you're going after a topic, you look in this, you see if it leads anyplace else, you assess it to see whether it actually answers or doesn't answer your question, you try to assess it, then you go to the next one. You might actually follow down some of the references here, and then you may stop and say, I'm not seeing anything new.
John Ellis: So now I'm gonna go over here. I'm gonna look just
John Ellis: So that type of research, that type loop.
John Ellis: Is something that, that, that we have done.
John Ellis: That's what the model is doing.
John Ellis: Other questions?
John Ellis: Alright, then I have a question for you.
John Ellis: How does a model new… know
John Ellis: It knows what it's supposed to do. You've asked to take on a task. Write me a program, solve this problem. How does it know
John Ellis: How to do that thing.
John Ellis: Honestly, like, I never have the back end of this, but if it has internet research, it clearly looks for how to do stuff, so it comes back and does that. Okay, so I could look it up.
John Ellis: Okay, if you're a faculty member, would you be happy with your student not just sort of looking up how to do a particular type of analysis, say, statistical analysis, and whatever they find on the internet, just go with it?
John Ellis: Not really, right? You really would not want to do that. Instead, you would want to have a prescribed set
John Ellis: of… Approaches, process knowledge, or specific domain knowledge of how to do this thing.
John Ellis: MLP is not going to cut it.
John Ellis: The multi-layer perceptron is a fuzzy JPEG,
John Ellis: It knows all the different ways of doing things, including all the very wrong ways of doing things.
John Ellis: This is where skills come in.
John Ellis: We're going to be taking a much deeper look at skills in just a little bit, but know the following. Skills are a collection of human-authored, by and large, human-authored
John Ellis: documents On how to do things.
John Ellis: And here's how you think about it.
John Ellis: Skills, you can have a large collection of skills that tell you how to do a particular thing. Could be an analysis, could be a particular type of work, we're going to see lots of different examples of this.
John Ellis: What the model does is… You ask it to do something.
John Ellis: And the first thing it does is assess whether or not there exists a skill
John Ellis: Which can give it guidance on how to do that thing.
John Ellis: which is the preferred way for you, your lab group, your organization, to solve a particular problem. It first looks to see if there's a standard, good way to do this. If it is, it takes up that one skill.
John Ellis: And puts it into the prompt.
John Ellis: But it only does so when you ask it to do that thing.
John Ellis: So it's dynamically loaded.
John Ellis: So this means it is sitting right next to the task
John Ellis: That the skill is meant to cover.
John Ellis: That's ideal.
John Ellis: That means attention is going to be acting on something which is close by.
John Ellis: And remember, the model doesn't have to follow the instructions, because remember, it is, you know, you saw the model works, but if it's sitting right there, and it speaks to directly how you're supposed to be doing this particular task, it will do it.
John Ellis: In addition, skills can also have pre-written Code.
John Ellis: So often the model will try to write code to solve a problem.
John Ellis: Fantastic. It can actually use the templated code, which it has here.
John Ellis: To actually write the code, and so now you're… things are becoming standardized.
John Ellis: It's human-readable. Can anybody guess what format, what… is this going to be a Word doc?
John Ellis: What do you think?
John Ellis: Markdown.
John Ellis: It's Markdown.
John Ellis: Human readable.
John Ellis: I consider this to be an extremely important socio-technical advancement.
John Ellis: Because this does a couple of very important things. One, it gives us traceability. We're going to be talking just a little bit about human and AI interaction. It's important for that. It is human author
John Ellis: Recent research showed that skills work best when they are authored by human and by an expert. Why? Because we're trying to figure out what the model does not know. We're trying to augment what the model doesn't know. If an AI writes a skill.
John Ellis: It already knew how to do that.
John Ellis: This also means it invites people into the process of sharing that expertise and guiding. It makes it in so it's not so black box.
John Ellis: How is the model going to solve the problem? Well, if you don't have a skill, it could be anything. Could look it up on the internet.
John Ellis: Just try to wing it. If there is a skill, and especially if that skill gets called, you can have more confidence that it's actually following the outline that you have.
John Ellis: Doesn't solve everything, but this puts people into the loop in another place, and a very important place as well.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: there is already, in this part, like, in the three-scale version, right, a text that is hanging out in the context that ChatGPT or
John Ellis: Anthropic, or whoever else has been certified to sit
John Ellis: about the taxes, kind of, like, be a good research assistant, do good things, probably, like, it's like a… what is it called? Because of constitution.
John Ellis: Well, -oh, oh, I'll just be clear, so you're saying that there's some text in the context. Actually, often that is in the alignment. So you can also… also, another thing that can be done is you might have an additional system prompt.
John Ellis: Possibly.
John Ellis: Here's an interesting thing, is, those types of very directive prompts work less well when you have reasoning models. I guess what I'm saying is, I've often been in the vision of prefacing something and saying.
John Ellis: don't make stuff up. Right. Right? Like, but it also has an instruction that I can't access that says, be a helpful research assistant. So, like… Oh, and that's the… yeah.
John Ellis: And so then I get this thing, which is really fascinating, except for there's one, like, research ungrounded thing that's been inserted in the middle, because it's trying to be helpful. And so…
John Ellis: So that's one side of it. The transparency question is.
John Ellis: where can I click to see what are all the skills and what are all the prompts in my interaction? Oh, you're gonna like this. So what's interesting is.
John Ellis: Observability. You're gonna see in most of the agent workflows that we're gonna have, it shows you where and when it pulls up the skills, and which documents it's pulling into. So here's what's missing, right? We have these cool… we have this op… this,
John Ellis: all of this. But what's missing is we need to know when things are going in.
John Ellis: We need to know what is going in, so we can have more confidence. That's what an agent harness does.
John Ellis: It makes it more observable.
John Ellis: But something else I want to point out, which is really important, you can have alignment which will drive behavior in broad ways, and you can have these general statements which will broad, you know, broadly drive what's going on. If you have very well populated context, those are the guardrails.
John Ellis: Which forced the model to actually justify
John Ellis: What it's going to be responding, but only if you have good context.
John Ellis: So let's make the… let's link the… let's make the leap to what agents are now, modern day.
John Ellis: Remember that we had the AI-dedicated computer use? Model could do all the things, it could write code and then run things, but we didn't have access to this instance, right?
John Ellis: This is a computer in the cloud, we couldn't load anything, it was just, like, it's for its own use. What if, instead.
John Ellis: We said, alright, you have access to my subdirectory.
John Ellis: I'm going to give you access to my subdirectory.
John Ellis: And I'm going to tell you exactly what you can do in terms of reading files, deleting files, doing work on my computer.
John Ellis: But this is the same thing as…
John Ellis: an LLM at your command line, typing commands into the command line, asking you Can I run this command?
John Ellis: That's gonna be an important part. But very much running code, accessing data in that subdirectory on your computer. Writing files, writing that task splits.
John Ellis: If you don't have the right software to do a particular task, downloading and installing the software, so you can do that task.
John Ellis: This entirely changes, not just in terms of incremental capability, because now, It can go…
John Ellis: Run, write code, if it's not running, loop.
John Ellis: Until the code is running, Because it can see that it's running or not running.
John Ellis: It can see whether it's gone to an answer or has not gone to an answer. It closes the loop.
John Ellis: And can directly produce artifacts locally, that you would use. Make me a PowerPoint.
John Ellis: make me a… make me a, a, an Excel workbook.
John Ellis: and return it.
John Ellis: There.
John Ellis: So now things become observable.
John Ellis: If we have a good harness, then that allows us to see which files have been pulled up and put into context.
John Ellis: It will tell us which skills have been used and applied when.
John Ellis: So we can actually trace and see what it's doing, when it's doing it.
John Ellis: That would be a good harness.
John Ellis: It turns out.
John Ellis: That, in terms of model performance, it is no longer the case that one model is just better than another. It's the combination of model and harness.
John Ellis: That's what's being discussed now. Do you have a good agent harness that allows you to do these things and gives you the observability in order to do these tasks?
John Ellis: When Matt was talking before about allowing the computer to work for about 8 hours, what he was talking about, he gave it a task, gave it information, and said, write this code, work on it until it works.
John Ellis: Closed loop
John Ellis: And this is called the horizon. How far, how long can it work before it has to come back and say, I've lost the thread, I don't know what I'm doing anymore?
John Ellis: That used to be minutes, now it is hours, and if you're very, very careful, it can even be weeks.
John Ellis: For very complex problems.
John Ellis: That's what we're going to be talking about here in the following sessions. We're going to be going into skills, we're going to be going to how to write them, how to actually use these agents to solve your problems, and how to do it responsibly, and do it in a way that we don't fall into the traps that we just naturally have as humans.
John Ellis: So, I would say let's go ahead and, I've given you a whole bunch. I'd say let's go ahead and take a short break.
John Ellis: Before we,
John Ellis: Before we go into our, our next session, go ahead and go up here, pull up the, the schedule.
John Ellis: Let's see where we are.
John Ellis: Okay, great.
John Ellis: Yes, we are due for a coffee break. Perfect timing. When we come back.
John Ellis: We are either going to talk about the psychology of human-AI collaboration, or we're going to talk about agents in action.
John Ellis: We'll see. See you in 15 minutes.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: Absolutely, absolutely.
John Ellis: It's journey.
John Ellis: et cetera.
John Ellis: Oh, really? Yeah, exactly. Yeah, there's, oh my god, well, welcome! She got there a year. So you're in Vanderbilt, or are you, working in town? No, I mean… Oh, okay, great.
John Ellis: So right now, it is up.
John Ellis: Fantastic. Yes, I mean… Yep. Skills on the difference.
John Ellis: But, obviously, we're not… No, absolutely. Yeah.
John Ellis: I'll do it as a Florida unit.
John Ellis: Great, well, so I'm so glad you're here. Yeah, no, this is great. No, that's hilarious.
John Ellis: That's all clear, it's awesome.
John Ellis: Really? Well, this… That's really funny. Yeah, yeah, I want to know.
John Ellis: Yes, it's exactly what it was. Yep.
John Ellis: That's it. That's it, that's it, that's it.
John Ellis: Yeah, I know.
John Ellis: Idaho.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: It's very interesting to see the market right now.
John Ellis: There, so we've also been assigned to that new.
John Ellis: Except for the people that we have to…
John Ellis: So, yeah, so I would solve that one?
John Ellis: Okay, that's fine enough, we'll get a bigger raw piece of it. Exactly, that's right. Yeah, I'm gonna get something else to, yes. Oh, good morning.
John Ellis: Excuse me.
John Ellis: You know, what about
John Ellis: This is so important.
John Ellis: And I text my agent, hey, can you look at this, right?
John Ellis: If they don't obviously my own being absent.
John Ellis: This thing's gonna do all in this movie.
John Ellis: Thank you.
John Ellis: It's interesting to learn with Vietnamese.
John Ellis: Yes, he is.
John Ellis: Oh, you were there! You could buy it! Yes, they're great.
John Ellis: practice in Korea.
John Ellis: No, give her a CS, not a CA database. Yeah, so I'll probably get some data.
John Ellis: was to actually do a million, so that was peer, so… So I felt that…
John Ellis: Yeah, yeah, no, that was good. Yeah, she reached out to me.
John Ellis: Perfect House, St. Louis, Catalia.
John Ellis: Yeah, 10.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: You did? Okay.
John Ellis: Welcome back, everybody.
John Ellis: I think I made a mistake.
John Ellis: On the sketch thread, We have, next, the psychology of Human-AI Collaboration.
John Ellis: But that doesn't really make sense unless we first talk about agents in action. It's beyond ChatGPT.
John Ellis: So, what I need to do is, I need to change the order of these, but I… I can't just do it in a different order. I need to change this on, the website, I need to change this in the subdirectories, I need to… every place where we talked about the order of this.
John Ellis: I use a chain to do that! Use AI to do that!
John Ellis: Oh, but it's gonna take me forever if I use just chat. Oh, man. So, you might not be surprised.
John Ellis: that I use agents a lot. So here… This is, right here, An example… of Claude Coke.
John Ellis: And in this pod code, we're gonna go all the way back. This is a long… I started way up here.
John Ellis: Doing something stupid to begin with. Okay.
John Ellis: How many of you… people here, use GitHub?
John Ellis: Okay, or correction, know that you should use GitHub.
John Ellis: And then how many of you have done work
John Ellis: and then realize that you didn't create a GitHub repository. This doesn't make sense to you, this is fine. And you realize, yeah. And then you're like, I have this whole thing, now I've got to turn it into… so I did the same thing when I was doing the work to create
John Ellis: the outline of this, and so the very first thing I said was, hey.
John Ellis: create a GitHub repository out of this, out of all this AI days, and put in my data science award.
John Ellis: Because I forgot to… so it did this, and it says, oh, I see the org! Yeah, which one is the data science org? In the meantime, I'll also check the current repo state. Which org should I use?
John Ellis: Notice what it's doing.
John Ellis: Now it's going through. These are command line tools, which you might or not recognize. If you don't, that's fine. They turn out to be extremely powerful, but only if you know them.
John Ellis: You can use them to pull up files, to create files, to move files, to inspect, to do keyword searches very flexibly. All these things are possible, but only if you know the command line tools really well, which I…
John Ellis: I forgot.
John Ellis: I knew them at one point, I don't know them as well anymore.
John Ellis: But the model isn't very well.
John Ellis: It knows all the Git commands, and so it's able to go through and carry out the work, because it knows where I'm supposed to be going. Oh, but notice, it didn't work.
John Ellis: It's still working on its own, I haven't done anything yet.
John Ellis: So, it goes through, And,
John Ellis: fixes it, it figures out the error, goes in and fixes. The repo was created on GitHub, but the push failed due to a key issue. I'm gonna switch to a different way of doing… done.
John Ellis: Repository's been created and pushed.
John Ellis: This is a significant amount of work. This would have taken me about 20, 30 minutes.
John Ellis: It really shouldn't have, but it wouldn't. So now, I say, look under the admin, this is a subdirectory for a transcript of a call that covers more items to include in the repo. I had a phone call.
John Ellis: Where we were talking about
John Ellis: about AI Days early on, and so I got a transcript of it. So, local recording, local transcript, and what I wanted to do was to include all the information that was in the call, this hour-long call, and make sure that those things made it into the repository and into the design of AI Days.
John Ellis: So instead of actually going through and trying to remember what I had, or taking… looking at my notes that I created during a call, I asked the AI to do it. So I simply said.
John Ellis: Follow the instructions to update the repo further. Let me read the transcript and check what's in the admin directory.
John Ellis: So it reads two files, let me also read the existing README.
John Ellis: Read 3 files. Now let me look at the… at a few session readings to understand what's already there. Good, now I have a thorough understanding of the transcript and the current repo state. Here's what I need to do.
John Ellis: Add lunch restaurant recommendations near the venue.
John Ellis: That's how you got those. Add info about the networking event, because I'd forgotten to put that in.
John Ellis: Mentions of AI Fridays, AI Showcase.
John Ellis: So all the things that you're seeing that are
John Ellis: On that list that you looked at, on that repo, actually came directly from the conversation that we had about these things.
John Ellis: directly into the repo. This is moving and marshalling information, which we created, but putting it into a form which is actionable for you all.
John Ellis: This is what it means to work with an agent, and you see how… why I think this is so different from…
John Ellis: Chat.
John Ellis: Because this goes all the way from the very general ideas, all the way into formatted, actionable, useful information.
John Ellis: And I did that.
John Ellis: A lot.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: So, when you said you had a conversation, was it, like, on Zoom, or Microsoft Teams, or which you generated a transcript? Yes.
John Ellis: So, one thing that I will do… so the question is, did I do this on Teams? Was it a local recording? Was it on Zoom?
John Ellis: And the answer is yes. All the… all those places matter. What's interesting is I never use, though, the AI agents that are available for summary or for that in meetings, because the agent has… does not have enough context to know what's important.
John Ellis: At the very end of the conversation, I said at the very end, I said, oh, we need to include AI Fridays in the AI deep dives, so people know about them.
John Ellis: Very niche conversation.
John Ellis: That wouldn't have even made it into an AI summary, but because I had the full context, because remember, we're talking about context.
John Ellis: That actually drove the design.
John Ellis: And the information. And so then the agent will say, well, look and then say, I don't know what an AI Day is, I don't know what an AI Friday is.
John Ellis: Go, search, find, fill in the information, and then… and then pull it together.
John Ellis: That's that agentic workflow.
John Ellis: Yes. That was my question as well, I think, and I was curious about, like, list of restaurants. It was able to do that part for me? So, it was able to do the list of restaurants, but I had to correct it a little bit, because it was sort of assuming general part of town. I said, no, no, no, use the address of the hotel.
John Ellis: Find those that are within walking distance, 10 minutes or less.
John Ellis: Then, proposal.
John Ellis: But this is the idea of, of, of… Some knowledge is there, And some isn't.
John Ellis: So, if I were to change my line of work and just decide to do event planning.
John Ellis: I would create a skill.
John Ellis: And the skill would say, when you are looking for restaurants, here are the things to look at.
John Ellis: Make sure it's closed. Use this tool to actually get the walking distance.
John Ellis: Those… that's repeatable knowledge that would reflect my expertise, that the agent… so when the agent gets dispatched to solve this problem, it doesn't know those things, but it knows it's being asked about walking distance to restaurants.
John Ellis: Pulls the skill, which reflects my knowledge to actually carry out the task.
John Ellis: More and more, that's what's happening.
John Ellis: vanilla agents, rather than being designed. This is how we used to do it. We used to design agents to do specific things. Now we have vanilla agents. They just do anything, but they use skills when needed, and then they become ultra-specialized.
John Ellis: Or skilled in particular domains.
John Ellis: And you can see where I'm going, and why I think it's so important for us to be here and talking.
John Ellis: You all are experts in a number of different domains.
John Ellis: By recording this information in skills that is human-readable, you can actually just give it to graduate students, you can give it to collaborators.
John Ellis: To read about how you think about it, how you carry out tasks.
John Ellis: And you can also make it available to agents and find out you can do some of that work there. Not completely, not completely on its own, but to accelerate the work.
John Ellis: Yes, and actually, if you don't mind, I'm gonna go ahead and,
John Ellis: correct what I just did, so I need to… I need to change, and help me, help me out here, so I need to,
John Ellis: And I'm gonna have to put this down.
John Ellis: And I'm sorry for the people in the back, I'll try to, project as much as I can. I need to, change, the order
John Ellis: Of the, of the program.
John Ellis: And, what I need to change is,
John Ellis: I want to get the titles in here.
John Ellis: So, swapped, the… Psychology… of human AI.
John Ellis: And… Agents in action.
John Ellis: Note that I'm not being very… it's sufficient here, right?
John Ellis: I'm gonna let go.
John Ellis: Kind of the key thing here, it's like, all the different words you can think of for thinking, it'll put them up randomly of what they are.
John Ellis: So this is the hallmarks of a good agent harness. It's really low level, it's a little bit ugly, but it's telling me what it's doing, it read the two files, I can easily see which two files it read.
John Ellis: Use this command, then it asks me what to do next. Do you want to proceed?
John Ellis: I have this turned on maximum safety, so it asks me about everything. It gets a little bit old, but this way I know exactly what I'm going to be giving permissions for.
John Ellis: I'm gonna go ahead and allow it to do those things, so now it's going to go through and start changing.
John Ellis: So you see it's actually going in and it's editing the markdown.
John Ellis: And so now, agents comes first, psychology comes second.
John Ellis: Do you want me to make this edit? Yes, I do.
John Ellis: So, a couple of other things I do want to mention here.
John Ellis: This plot code, which is what you're looking at right here, has what's called Progressive Disclosure capabilities. This is excellent software engineering.
John Ellis: As I begin to do things, it begins to express to me different ways, more advanced ways that I could do things, but it doesn't show everything all at once. After I do things manually for a little while, it'll say, hey, did you know that you can?
John Ellis: So, even though this may look a little bit foreign, know that once you get into it, you can talk in plain language.
John Ellis: And work with it, and it will expose to you additional capabilities incrementally.
John Ellis: Okay, do I want to go… oh, it's doing the Git, it's doing the Git, so in other words.
John Ellis: Those of you who don't get, it's actually saying, oh, you made this change, let's go ahead and put it up on the web.
John Ellis: So it's bringing up the web form.
John Ellis: All right, done. Swapped the two sessions. Updated both the scheduled tables and the direction and session times.
John Ellis: In each section's reading, it's been fixed, so it looks like it's been fixed everywhere.
John Ellis: Now, I can't at this point say, Check everyone.
John Ellis: Make sure.
John Ellis: I'm in the loop. I can decide what's going to be happening.
John Ellis: I'm gonna hold off on doing that right now, just so I can answer questions. So what questions do you have about what you've seen? It was doing very technical stuff that we didn't actually have to know.
John Ellis: What did we do? We said, I want to swap these two, and it handled those parts.
John Ellis: Question.
John Ellis: So one of the applications that I'm watching this and thinking very hard about as a researcher, and even as a staff worker.
John Ellis: Data is never clean, and data is never right. It's awful. And it's… it's that, what's the best use of my time?
John Ellis: Have you guys used this in large scale to clean data, and is that something that's very learnable?
John Ellis: So…
John Ellis: interesting thing about data, we used to think that in order for AI to use data, it had to be cleaned first.
John Ellis: Because garbage in, garbage out, right? We all know this, right?
John Ellis: Not really. It turns out there is structure, there's semantics, there's meaning there. Have you ever actually looked at the transcript that you get out of, like, the iPhone audio? It's pretty bad.
John Ellis: Right? But… When you use a model like that has attention.
John Ellis: That is a transformer model in all of the previous contexts influences what the interpretation of words should be.
John Ellis: That's not what the word was, right? It translated it like this, but no, it's got to be this other, because the entire rest of the conversation
John Ellis: was about ChatGPT, not chat.
John Ellis: This is not a street food, right? The correct word that went… he mumbled it. I mumble a lot.
John Ellis: But it was ChatGT. Therefore, correction.
John Ellis: So, the structure of the whole Influences the individual words.
John Ellis: Even messy data, terrible messy data, is useful.
John Ellis: This is not like machine learning where things must be formatted and correct before it can be used.
John Ellis: All data, so long it is not… so long as it's relevant, is useful.
John Ellis: And that's, that's one of the lessons here.
John Ellis: Yes, question.
John Ellis: So, in the cloud interface there, early on, you said you'd forgotten some of the problems. Many.
John Ellis: I forgot many. It looked like the style, you'll put in information. Yeah. But just there, you used it just like you would if you saw it live. So here, everything which is gray is what I've typed.
John Ellis: Right?
John Ellis: And everything which is in white, and in other is what the model has done.
John Ellis: So you'll notice I'm actually doing very little technical stuff, but it is kind of off-putting, right?
John Ellis: So this can be… So, what we really need to make this more… Useful.
John Ellis: Is maybe a different kind of an interface.
John Ellis: This is Claude Kogle.
John Ellis: Claude Co-work is Claude Code, but with an easier-to-access interface, but there are trade-offs.
John Ellis: One.
John Ellis: you don't get to see as much of what's happening under the covers. It's going to be doing work for you, it's going to be writing code for you to do things.
John Ellis: But the code is not the point, the work is the point.
John Ellis: So this is appropriate for some things, but not for creating software.
John Ellis: And not for doing… so think of cloud code as being the most general.
John Ellis: But it's going to be the ugliest. And you have to do more work to say, okay, now show this to me. Make this for me. We're going to see lots of examples of that, but this is Cloud Co-work. Funny thing is, cloud co-work is so new.
John Ellis: It is a pain to install.
John Ellis: I guess it's Sonya.
John Ellis: But underneath the covers, it has all of Claude Code, but it's exposed in a more, useful way. So here's…
John Ellis: Here's… Me.
John Ellis: In conversation a few days ago about this. I want to create
John Ellis: a schedule for the AI Days event. See if I can zoom this in.
John Ellis: All right. Given the AI Day session planning, and assuming a 9am start time, an hour for lunch, day one Wednesday ending at 5, and a networking event at 5.30, make a spreadsheet for me to work on with the start times. If you include… now, this is me speaking to it, right? So this is why I have to run on sentences, because I'm using voice-to-text.
John Ellis: Assume they're all in the same room. I'll later play with all these assumptions, including the durations.
John Ellis: So, what did it do? Well, we can actually look, the user wants me… this is the thinking, right?
John Ellis: So the user wants me.
John Ellis: to create a spreadsheet to include for an AI day. So, first let me check what files are available. Then, I need to read the XLSX skill. In other words, they want me to create a spreadsheet. I don't know how to create a spreadsheet. I need to pull up the skill so I will know how to create a spreadsheet.
John Ellis: So it does the commands, it's listing all the files, it has the output, it sees all the files that are there.
John Ellis: Read the SkillMD. Oh, it's not gonna be open up for me right now. Read the session planning. Now I have the session planning document!
John Ellis: So this is all they're doing before it comes back to me.
John Ellis: So what I see is…
John Ellis: All right. All forms are verified. There are going to be two sheets, AIG Schedule and Team Availability.
John Ellis: Because in the conversations I had.
John Ellis: with the data science team members and others, I found out when they were available.
John Ellis: For example, in Wanchauguri, you know, could teach both days, but, the scope presenter was only going to be available for the second day.
John Ellis: And so he's going to be presenting tomorrow. Good thing, because his flight was canceled, so he's not gonna convene until tomorrow.
John Ellis: But all of these were included in the conversation, but nowhere in structured information. So what it did was it realized, first of all, that it needed to have the availability so it could do the planning of the sessions.
John Ellis: So think about it, that comes from the pre-training.
John Ellis: That comes from the model having this broad-world knowledge about what it means to plan broadly. And so I took action on that, rather than me having to say, create a spreadsheet, now do it in the following way.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: Well, you'll notice, day one wraps well before 5PM with the current session durations. You may want to trim some durations, because on the second day, you have 8 plus hours.
John Ellis: So this is the schedule it came up with.
John Ellis: This is me. Did you square team availability with the sessions they were supposed to teach? Does it work out?
John Ellis: Again, thought process.
John Ellis: So it goes through… It's auditable, I can see what it's pulling up, and it goes through.
John Ellis: So you can see what this work looks like.
John Ellis: I don't have to be copying and pasting, that's sort of the least of it. It has access to all the context, but it doesn't put it all in the working memory, in the content. It has it available and pulls up parts as it needs to.
John Ellis: And this very much constrains and drives how it's going to be solving the problem.
John Ellis: Okay, so… Just to give you an idea.
John Ellis: This goes on for a while.
John Ellis: This is not the only thing that I'm doing.
John Ellis: As I'm doing this work, I have other things that I'm doing as well, because I'm giving it time to think.
John Ellis: So I'm doing a fairly complex job of
John Ellis: Okay, yes, me, Jesse Spitzer-Smith, is presenting the agent skills. Got it.
John Ellis: I'm looking over, I'm seeing when it comes back with questions, or when it thinks that it's done, and I'm doing another task.
John Ellis: So, this would have taken me about half a day, certainly, to do this. And it identified problems that I was not aware of.
John Ellis: So… This is a Gentic workflow.
John Ellis: Without the code.
John Ellis: And it even went on, I went on to actually ask about, Tell me about who's in…
John Ellis: So…
John Ellis: Help me analyze the AI data registration.
John Ellis: So here's something that I wanted to point out.
John Ellis: You all provided answers in the survey about your backgrounds, some of you shared skills, your research interests, and I needed to understand who was going to be here.
John Ellis: Where you all were from.
John Ellis: In your back.
John Ellis: So one way is to go through and to read through all 230 applications.
John Ellis: And try to understand, which you can do.
John Ellis: Or, I could have come up with a dashboard.
John Ellis: here's a… here's a graph, here's a pie graph of how many people are from Divinity versus School of Engineering versus
John Ellis: Or, and I think this is where we are now.
John Ellis: Rather than having pre-designed dashboards, we have conversations.
John Ellis: Here's what I found.
John Ellis: 270 registrations as of today, with 6 more coming in just last today. Registration has been steady since the form opened February 13th, with noticeable bumps on February 17th, we sent out an email. February 23rd, we sent out another email. And February 26th, we sent out another email.
John Ellis: Okay, so we have 68… 33% faculty, staff is 54, 26%, students, external, other, alumni.
John Ellis: Email confirmation status is sparse. That's okay. You all who said that you weren't going to be coming, well, you're not here, but you told us you weren't going to be here, that was nice.
John Ellis: School for students is messy.
John Ellis: I think this was… School data for students is messy, lots of variant spellings.
John Ellis: It kind of makes sense. Some people said SOM.
John Ellis: versus School of Medicine. How could it tell? Because it had other contexts be able to do some bigly. This goes to the heart of messy data. It's okay that it's messy. Matter of fact, I think we are now past… we're going to see it for a while, but we're past the drop-down menu of selecting only which is there. That was designed to make it easier for static programs to work.
John Ellis: With agents, that doesn't matter anymore. Free text is more valuable.
John Ellis: Tell me about the departments by school.
John Ellis: Medicine?
John Ellis: VMEC, Nursing, you're representing. Arts and Sciences, you're here in 4. Central, Administration, 16. You know, we have lots of folks from OVPRI, VUIT, Engineering, Connected Computing, Divinity.
John Ellis: And then also external partners as well.
John Ellis: So… We did not do this, but I do do this when I do education, especially with companies.
John Ellis: Is at this point, we can say, help me come up with exercises that make sense for this population.
John Ellis: Form groups.
John Ellis: Come up with examples that will land with
John Ellis: Here are the learning objectives I have. Do you remember learning objectives? How many people here are, you know, build courses or teach courses?
John Ellis: And how many people here feel like you use your learning objectives, like, regularly after you come up with it?
John Ellis: And somebody is so good. Most of you didn't… but now you can!
John Ellis: Because now, that is exactly the context that you need. You can say, given my learning objectives of what I want to accomplish for this entire course, help me come up with relevant examples that will specifically address those skills or understandings.
John Ellis: In the language and using the background of the people so they will understand.
John Ellis: So far from actually sort of separating us from others, this can actually allow us to personalize to a level and to a degree that we've never been able to do before, but do so guided by the highest ideas that we have for research, for our teaching.
John Ellis: So long as we are explicit about that, and we take the time to actually, again, practice the top of our license, right?
John Ellis: Nobody else is going to be able to come up with the learning objectives for our courses.
John Ellis: We're the only ones who know what's really important for people to walk away with.
John Ellis: We have the materials!
John Ellis: We're the experts.
John Ellis: So… This is… this is the context that we've been, talking about in here.
John Ellis: Alright.
John Ellis: So, this is an example, another example of an agent.
John Ellis: Let me show you yet another example of an agent, so you can start getting an idea of what this looks like. We talked about,
John Ellis: We talked before about, search, and about deep research.
John Ellis: And, so I'm gonna be pulling up a deep research here.
John Ellis: So… I was…
John Ellis: concerned about… let's see… so it's not the exact one that I wanted to have, but it doesn't really matter. Oh, that one's… yes, okay.
John Ellis: And this segues well, because this is what we are talking about next.
John Ellis: So here's a paper.
John Ellis: Artificial intelligence and illusions of Understanding in Scientific Research. So I mentioned before that my background, my PhD is in cognitive psychology and cognitive science. This is something which I am actually very concerned about.
John Ellis: Well, no, that's a different view.
John Ellis: and this is a very good paper on this, and it addresses issues that I think are really
John Ellis: Terrifically important.
John Ellis: illusion of explanatory depth, I think this is incredibly important. We…
John Ellis: If we can underst… if we can state something simply, we believe that we have a depth of knowledge in it. Why? Because we can't go around always assessing the depth of our knowledge. It takes too much time. Do you really have half an hour to go through and assess your own knowledge when somebody says to you, do you understand?
John Ellis: They say, well, yeah, I got, I got them. Why? Because I can tell the simple story of it.
John Ellis: And generally, that's not a bad idea. In order for you to tell the simple story, you probably have to understand the details.
John Ellis: accepts.
John Ellis: When you have an AI that can tell you the simple story very easily. And you know the simple story without having done the work.
John Ellis: And so now we think we've got it when we don't.
John Ellis: And so AIs, just naturally, by the way of what they're doing, and how we tend to use them, step all over that heuristic that we use, and give us a false sense of depth of understanding. Not good.
John Ellis: illusion of explanatory breadth. We think we sort of covered everything in all hypotheses, because I call this proof by exhaustion.
John Ellis: You know, I thought about it until I was just tired, and I think I covered all of it.
John Ellis: AI can actually…
John Ellis: Either assist that, or actually make that worse, because you assumed that the… looked like the search was going pretty broadly, that it's covered everything.
John Ellis: Especially chat. So this is a huge problem with chat.
John Ellis: This is a problem with chat. Illusions of objectivity, definitely a problem with chat.
John Ellis: Here's my question.
John Ellis: Does the picture change when we introduce the idea
John Ellis: Of highly, of powerful agents and a new type of workflow that you've just seen.
John Ellis: I'm no longer chatting. I'm actually providing context and engaging with the material that I'm getting back.
John Ellis: And able to probe and ask questions and have it go and assess and come back to me. So, do these still fold?
John Ellis: That's my question.
John Ellis: So… I had my ideas.
John Ellis: And here's the prompt that I gave. You know, consider the very latest developed in agentic AI, especially since December 2025, where instead of using a chat interface, researchers are now able and more likely to be using an agent interface. And I tried to describe everything. You notice this is a long prompt, right?
John Ellis: And I describe exactly what I mean by the agent.
John Ellis: This is my sixth attempt at this, because here's the problem I ran into.
John Ellis: And I have started to bring this up just a little bit with the conversation with Matt in the morning.
John Ellis: Agents as they now exist are a very recent phenomenon. I do not believe that we have had this type of interaction with agents in the form that we have them now, combined with skills.
John Ellis: I don't think that we really had that before December of 2025.
John Ellis: When did the training for the models end?
John Ellis: Some of them in 2024, some of them earlier in 2025, in the most latest ones. They don't have the concepts
John Ellis: Of what it means to interact with a non-human intelligence.
John Ellis: They don't have that as a concept.
John Ellis: And so, to leverage beyond their existing knowledge, I had to create this framework to get that right, because it kept on skewing off and saying, well, agents like Codex, like, no, no, no, no, no, no.
John Ellis: Agents like you might build. No.
John Ellis: So, this is a good example of where when you go beyond what the models know, so think of the example that I gave you before of COVID. The models didn't know about it, they couldn't represent it, they had trouble actually processing it. In this case.
John Ellis: A new concept, you have to build all the scaffolding around it.
John Ellis: You don't get just to say, you know what I mean.
John Ellis: So this is us practicing to the top of our craft. We have to be very specific about what we mean when we go beyond the general knowledge of the models.
John Ellis: If we're filling in information, not a problem. Skills, fill in information.
John Ellis: So, the skill… you know, one of the skills is build… a PowerPoint.
John Ellis: Well, the model is all about programming, and knows all about some of the libraries that you use to actually directly create a PowerPoint. There are libraries where you write code, and it creates the PowerPoint for you, this is what they're doing.
John Ellis: The skill fills in the knowledge and says, this is what a good PowerPoint looks like. By the way, generate a PDF of this and look at it afterwards. Do a visual inspection of it to make sure that it's good. That's what the skill does. That's… I call that filling in the interstitial spaces with specific domain knowledge and process knowledge.
John Ellis: Extending beyond that is much more difficult.
John Ellis: So when we hear conversations about automated science.
John Ellis: rather than being sort of concerned, I'm like, Good luck.
John Ellis: Because it doesn't come without the scaffold. This is what it's in.
John Ellis: So now let's actually dive into
John Ellis: Some of the, human-person, interaction.
John Ellis: So let's look specific at the core risks here.
John Ellis: Illusion of explanatory death.
John Ellis: Chat returns with very confident responses.
John Ellis: We tend to believe them because they're confident responses, and we have no traceability.
John Ellis: It is the oracle answering the question.
John Ellis: Agents, we get to see what they're doing and how they're solving it, and we can ask it to be rerun.
John Ellis: Under different assumptions. We could look at the code if we needed to, if this is something that was writing code.
John Ellis: rerun… rerunnable computation.
John Ellis: So this is a key differentiator between chat and agents.
John Ellis: Second, Skills.
John Ellis: Forcing explicit method steps.
John Ellis: There is no steering a chat model on how it's solving a problem, and it is opaque.
John Ellis: With agent models, Skills can force, or strongly suggest, a direction to take.
John Ellis: And, you may notice… over here…
John Ellis: it's actually telling me, and this is the actual search that it's doing, and actually, here, let me show you over here as well. Smaller.
John Ellis: This is an example of an agent.
John Ellis: might have to go to another one.
John Ellis: Where it shows me what it's doing, and the tools that it's using. The context, and the tools that it's using.
John Ellis: So now we have observability in what's happening.
John Ellis: And you can expect the skill.nd itself. We're going to look at skills in just a little bit.
John Ellis: You can actually inspect them, write them, and modify them.
John Ellis: You can't do that with chat.
John Ellis: So… That's good news. Agents plus skills can mitigate Illusion of explanatory deaths.
John Ellis: I'm happy with this because that's what I… Thought go down.
John Ellis: Here's something that I did not think was gonna happen. And so this is deep research.
John Ellis: finding and pulling this up and doing reasoning, and so this is an example of a very purpose-driven agent. We're looking at the output of ChatGPT 5.2 Pro.
John Ellis: Delegation gets easier.
John Ellis: This attribution gets easier.
John Ellis: If you offload the cognitive labor and you don't engage and use this as an exploratory tool to move forward.
John Ellis: then you could be in trouble. Think about Matt, when he lets it run for 8 hours. That's fine if it's code.
John Ellis: That's not great if you're actually doing research.
John Ellis: And again, looks like science can feel like understanding.
John Ellis: It can produce the UI, it can produce the graphs to make it feel like you understand more than you actually do. So this requires an orientation and a rigor that we must teach our students as well.
John Ellis: That it is easy to fall into the trap.
John Ellis: I see… I teach a graduate course in generative AI.
John Ellis: And very… they get this and more, in all the cognitive psychology, and yet, when we hit the midterm.
John Ellis: There are very surprised faces, because I have them in term, and I say, use whatever you want, but just don't use an AI when you're doing… when you're doing this. Go through, and all of a sudden, it hits.
John Ellis: Because the feeling is, you know.
John Ellis: We can't trust our internal metrics of how well we know something. We have to force ourselves through process.
John Ellis: Perhaps through a skill which does not allow us to go through unless we actually demonstrate sufficient knowledge. There needs to be that check in the work that we do, because otherwise it's far too easy to fall into this trial.
John Ellis: And then audit features that are not meaningful can also cause problems. So questions, questions about illusions of explanatory depth, and how agents sort of interact with those.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: There's a…
John Ellis: It's not an article, but some publication every year 13s that GPT 5.2 drive the new result in theoretical physics.
John Ellis: So, remember when Matt was talking about, sort of that incremental
John Ellis: you know, that incremental new development. In those cases, yeah, I think… because in my mind, that still is filling in. We have a theory here, we have a theory here.
John Ellis: And if you combine them, then you can do something which is novel.
John Ellis: But it's not brand new conceptual, right? This is not a new unified field theory. This is filling in. I'll give you an example of this. Did you know… I'm gonna brag. Humble brag.
John Ellis: So you know, the Data Science Institute has the world's leading model that accounts for the presence and location of water in protein-protein binding.
John Ellis: Tiny… no, we're not big, but we actually produce the software that pharmacy companies, that researchers across the world use, that they want to actually predict the action of water, because when you do protein-protein binding.
John Ellis: It only works if we also really account for the action of water and also heavy ions. Oh, by the way, we also have very heavy ions. So, well, how do we do that? Well.
John Ellis: We took existing papers and existing software when Claude 1 first came out.
John Ellis: And actually put them all together and said, okay, we think that there's another way to do this. We don't want to just predict, we want to treat this as a distribution. Help us think through.
John Ellis: And so, with the AI, not automated, but with the AI, we were able to very quickly iterate through.
John Ellis: I believe, and we'll have to drive this sometime, that with an AI, we could actually have filled in those points now using
John Ellis: using, an agent.
John Ellis: But this was not new, this was filling in ideas that were adjacent and almost there, that, hey, why not use a diffusion model?
John Ellis: And treat it almost like you're drawing a picture.
John Ellis: Of where that water goes, and why, and the probability distributions.
John Ellis: So, is it brand new? It felt brand new, because it wasn't done before, but it was not a new area of science.
John Ellis: Other questions?
John Ellis: Then let's take a moment, and let's go and take a look at, at,
John Ellis: A couple of the important things.
John Ellis: Explanatory breadth.
John Ellis: So we can certainly broaden retrieval. As a matter of fact, you're looking at an example of the broadening of retrieval here.
John Ellis: Because what we have here is…
John Ellis: the AI agent, having done a fair amount of work.
John Ellis: To look at a wide range of viewpoints And papers.
John Ellis: Skills, again, can encode this work.
John Ellis: And so the best practice is to not stop until you've explored multiple areas.
John Ellis: The downside is standardized pipelines, but we have this all ready.
John Ellis: We know that there are fields of science where there are recipes you follow to do certain things, and nobody questions what those methodologies are anymore.
John Ellis: Skills are just going to entrench that a little bit even further.
John Ellis: Agents themselves can shake inquiry, but this is where our rigor and paying attention to how broadly we go and using tools as an exploration becomes important.
John Ellis: So what's the take-home message?
John Ellis: The take-home message here is.
John Ellis: Agents are a tool that can be used to mitigate the problems that we have definitely seen with chat interfaces.
John Ellis: But they're not just a full solution without additional work. Skills are going to be an important part of how we actually mitigate
John Ellis: these possible harms, What's most important is that you understand, and this is why we're meeting here today.
John Ellis: How the models are working.
John Ellis: what the… where they are… how the models are likely to work, and the importance of having that context be well curated. Who does the curation of the context? You do.
John Ellis: What papers do you put in there? What backgrounds? Where do you steer it? It's all inputting that before the agent for it to do work.
John Ellis: Data doesn't have to be perfect, doesn't have to be pristine. As a matter of fact, sometimes uglier is better.
John Ellis: Alright.
John Ellis: Yes, I have a couple questions. One of them is about
John Ellis: this trust space. Because what we're doing here, there's an assumption that, like, the things that are in the text on the left are actually well backed up by the things that are over on the right.
John Ellis: I think that I have lots of experience, right, with a profound disjuncture, on those things. And so, the fact that you had
John Ellis: it's ChatGPT Pro in this case, right? Like, replicate your sort of initial punch on
John Ellis: how are agents actually solving this problem? Yeah, that actually makes siloing worse. Yeah, like, it's… and it couldn't…
John Ellis: very helpfully tell you that you're right, and… and not really get into… like, it seems to me that a lot of these issues, from the published literature are about the, like, the singularity of the narrative, right? It's if there's a singular narrative voice, then you're gonna trust it more and have less understanding of the divergences of the underlying literature, assuming they're being summarized both, right?
John Ellis: And so… and this is an area where, like, like, Sean vendors work on, like, information, like, LLMs, it's information retrieval devices.
John Ellis: is a front of, like, that's the problem for that. So agents don't change that, right? Yeah, agents don't change that, but agents do change and ease the availability of multiple other contacts as well.
John Ellis: The underlying architecture is exactly the same that it was before, but now it's become easier to say, okay, redo completely, but use as a starting point this alternative.
John Ellis: That's… that's the key. It's not that they… that they are different, but they offer different capabilities. If we use that… If that cycle takes…
John Ellis: To be blunt, right? Like, and so if my agent's been spewing out this thing, then 15 minutes later, he came up with an overall summary.
John Ellis: and then you come back to it, you're like, actually, I think your assumptions are wrong. Do I have another 15 minutes to wake you out? Another 15 minutes again, because… We are so spoiled. No, I'm serious.
John Ellis: there is a sort of question of, we have two… we have different tool paths, right? One of which is to, for us to say, hey.
John Ellis: Here's 10 articles.
John Ellis: would you like me to summarize a few of them? These are where they disagree, etc. Or to say, like, here's… I'm going to tell you what
John Ellis: And what we know is that, like, Assuming that this…
John Ellis: correctly summarized, that summarizing could be useful. If it even correctly summarized, you would not know.
John Ellis: And having just run this on, like, the, like, U.S, bombing of Minecraft.
John Ellis: I got Gemini Pro to give me increasingly more folks, but increasingly… but equally specific. So, in chat, right? You were sort of in chat, and you were sort of steering it towards… Right, yeah.
John Ellis: Like, by asking all the right questions, having taken, you know, having taken, like, a…
John Ellis: prompting workshop and going through a band course and all those things. Like, it's still… there's a capacity for it to
John Ellis: keep to its narrative, and double down on its narrative. Let me pause you there, just… you're bringing up a really important point here. You have, because you're in chat, and this is critical.
John Ellis: And this is a huge difference.
John Ellis: You have a single context.
John Ellis: That you're continuing down.
John Ellis: So you have started with an article, you've asked questions, you've asked other questions, but the preponderance… and remember, attention, right? It's driving you down because you have now… now you're adding on, but you have all of this still there. What happens with agents?
John Ellis: One of the powerful things about agents is you spin up new contacts, and so you don't have polluted context from the prior.
John Ellis: Multiples.
John Ellis: and multiples easily. So he said, if I go for 8 minutes and then I have to redo it again, the point of HNCs, you can explicitly beforehand say, you take this idea, you take the other guy, you take the other idea in separate contexts.
John Ellis: This is not just a nice city, this is important. In separate contexts, And then come together
John Ellis: And square them.
John Ellis: Or show where they do not.
John Ellis: It's a very different way of interacting with them. Chat has significant problems that are very difficult to overcome simply because of the nature of how attention works.
John Ellis: So, I think that we have a good opportunity here to work in a different way.
John Ellis: I don't?
John Ellis: So, I didn't start, right? I started with a, please find all
John Ellis: So I speak neither Farsi nor Arabic, but I said, please find all Farsi and Arabic news sources non-stop. So, I think last year this week, we might want to…
John Ellis: I, I could do that with an agent. If you think there would be a different result, we could… I kept the script, and we could… Yeah, I would say, look, let's have conversation during, during, during chat, during chat, during, during lunch.
John Ellis: What's important to keep in mind is that the current work styles that we've had
John Ellis: And, and what happens in chat are different.
John Ellis: So, can I say that they're going to be better? I don't know, because it depends on your interaction with them, but they're definitely going to be different.
John Ellis: And it's important to keep in mind what made
John Ellis: chat worked the way that it did. Now we understand that context drives, and that we have attention.
John Ellis: And that we have the multilayer perceptron, so that's being driven in particular. That's why I'm being very intentional about the autoregressive and moving in a particular direction.
John Ellis: And it is very much being steered by the previous interactions. Everything which is in that context.
John Ellis: So now, one possibility with agents is you can start and explore multiple paths.
John Ellis: But we have to do so intentional.
John Ellis: Understand what the technology is, what it means, and then explore the uses. Yes?
John Ellis: So, in context, the bias being, I guess, one question will be something just our expectations. Yes. Should we accept getting those objects to…
John Ellis: Excuse me.
John Ellis: You know, subject to be spilled into the sanctuary, but I participate.
John Ellis: So we talked about the training of the models, and that within, that within the models, right, the learning is deeply within these MLPs, right? That's not coming out, right?
John Ellis: But now with other kinds of bias, really, this is going to be much more driven by the context you've given.
John Ellis: So previously, when we had short contacts, you were getting just what was in the ML feeds. Now.
John Ellis: What really matters is, What did you make available?
John Ellis: And what is being loaded up? And this could be skills, this could be documents. We are curating that context
John Ellis: And so it's up to us what's in there. Now, if you, if you,
John Ellis: And if you're doing qualitative research.
John Ellis: you can very explicitly then explore this. If you have this as the context, how does that change the understanding and the narrative?
John Ellis: You can directly inspect that.
John Ellis: And… and…
John Ellis: And through using agents, not because they're magic, but just because it makes it easier for us. We can do exploration of what that means and how that changes. To me, that's fascinating. How does my… does the same statement change depending on the prior context?
John Ellis: I love that, and I love the fact that we have the ability to inspect that much more directly.
John Ellis: But it is not a fantasy, it's not a magic bullet.
John Ellis: As we can see, they can actually
John Ellis: Further the harms, rather than mitigate them, if we don't use them intentionally.
John Ellis: Other questions?
John Ellis: Yes. Is this, in essence, a, A gradient descent problem?
John Ellis: In terms of chat, where you're basically starting off one path of
John Ellis: Your objective, and the point interactive, or you're reducing potential other… Paths.
John Ellis: So, the question is this gradient descent, and for those of you who don't know, actually, that's how the models themselves are trained?
John Ellis: how we choose those 1 trillion different numbers, and so they can represent the knowledge that we want to have. That's actually through stochastic gradient descent, or derivatives of that. And the question here is, is this kind of the same thing when we're following the path? I would say, in some ways, we're narrowing, we're not necessarily optimizing, but it is autoregressive, so the longer the context gets.
John Ellis: The more difficult it gets to get it out of us.
John Ellis: So, before, when I was showing you the prompt that, where I came up with, in particular.
John Ellis: This prompt right here
John Ellis: It was almost like what you might… what you might call, hyperparameter tuning, right? I had to come up with the right context so we could actually understand what I meant by agent work, so we could actually do an honest assessment, or a better assessment of, in this new way of working, how does that interact with the known problems with chat?
John Ellis: Does it mitigate? Does it exacerbate?
John Ellis: So… I guess.
John Ellis: But it's not… it's not really… we're not optimizing. But yes, it is… it is iteration.
John Ellis: So…
John Ellis: I'll tell you a software story to sort of get you… get the idea of what I'm talking about here in terms of what this means in terms of research.
John Ellis: Almost all of software engineering, of planning and something called Agile, is all about managing risk.
John Ellis: Here's the problem. If you design software, and you spend, you know, 6 months developing the software, and then you get to the end, and the user says, that's not what I wanted.
John Ellis: You have to rewrite all the software. It's expensive, it's horrible, everyone's unhappy, and so we did this thing that's called Agile, where it's like, okay, you write the software, and then you show what you've done, like, in a sprint, like, one week, and then you do that, and it's fine.
John Ellis: So what we're finding now is that with software development, even that is broken because the cost of redoing everything is so low.
John Ellis: go ahead, agent, and then, you know, just like what Man was talking about, he comes back, and it's like, not exactly what he wants, so he has to redo it.
John Ellis: What he has to do is simply give it another instruction and say, no, I meant this, and then it rebuilds everything.
John Ellis: The cost of
John Ellis: Of the cost of rebuilding, looking at it from a different angle, trying something new is so low that there's nothing keeping us from inspecting and searching broadly.
John Ellis: Of what the solution might look like.
John Ellis: You want to investigate counterfactuals? You absolutely can. And you can do so in perils.
John Ellis: So, we have much broader reach, but we have to get used to what we have now. The risk is much lower.
John Ellis: Have you ever had, those of you who have graduate students, do you have a graduate student who's starting down the wrong path, and they just don't get back with you, and you're, like, 6 months down the road, and you're like.
John Ellis: Man, you gotta redo all this.
John Ellis: You were thinking about it wrong.
John Ellis: It happens, and it's painful.
John Ellis: Well, now, you can actually explore the…
John Ellis: Way down the path early, and then reshape if you need to quickly.
John Ellis: The risk is lower, but we need to be taking the steps to actually take advantage of what the capabilities are.
John Ellis: It's like… I don't know if the software story landed, but it's de-risking research.
John Ellis: Alright, other questions?
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: Can you elaborate a little bit on the architecture of the agent? It's like the quad for the agent itself, like, is it, like, a supervisor, and do you have soft agents, or how?
John Ellis: Like, how sh… how is it… how would it be helpful to think about it?
John Ellis: So, the clon code agent is actually very… it's pretty simple.
John Ellis: It is making calls out to you, so you can see, so it's actually here.
John Ellis: We can see when it's, it's,
John Ellis: So here, it is running… when it says read to files, that means it pulled them up, so it's able to run code, it pulls it up, and then sends it off to the LLM. So when it says reading, that means the AI is now inspecting that, pulling that into context, looking at it.
John Ellis: And then making a judgment.
John Ellis: So the way to think about it is the graph that we had before.
John Ellis: It is writing code, Pulling results, and then putting it into context.
John Ellis: then making judgments, and then writing more code. So this is the loop, this is the path back and forth.
John Ellis: Pulling files, pulling parts of files, running code, getting results.
John Ellis: 412 plus 1 is 413.
John Ellis: the capital of… The state of Washington is Olympian.
John Ellis: Back and forth.
John Ellis: The content of this file, this article, the third paragraph of this article was.
John Ellis: Here's keyword search.
John Ellis: The other thing that Harness allows it to do, that CloudKo's allows it to do, is to create multiple agents to work in parallel on problems as well.
John Ellis: That happens frequently, where each agent has its own context.
John Ellis: So it starts fresh.
John Ellis: Uncontaminated by the previous one.
John Ellis: So, clock code… is…
John Ellis: Software written around, where it simply keeps track of the agent that it's talking to, the files that it has, allows those… allows new software to be written and to be run.
John Ellis: That's what that harness is doing.
John Ellis: And that's kind of evolved.
John Ellis: It's playing the role that you used to play when you would copy and paste the errors in.
John Ellis: Write down and keep track of what was happening.
John Ellis: startup like I was doing, The new chat each time.
John Ellis: That's been canceled.
John Ellis: When there are those powerful agents, is it…
John Ellis: supervised by something? So, we'll get into the weeds a little bit, and that's… that's fine.
John Ellis: Previously, there was a significant amount of work around agent architectures and orchestration.
John Ellis: This was a huge area of work and of research.
John Ellis: And the way that you built solutions before was you would…
John Ellis: build an orchestration layer where you had… you'd build an agent that would do this thing, you'd build another agent that was doing this thing, and then they would communicate in this very particular way. It's effortful, it's very difficult to do, but that's what we had for agents before, and this is why it's so hard to get the models to think about agents in a new way. We did so much of that.
John Ellis: Now, what we have… is agents that are very general purpose, what I call the vanilla agents.
John Ellis: Because now you don't have to give them any specific skills, you give them a task.
John Ellis: And then what do they do? They go look up the skill.
John Ellis: And then they become specialized, because they've filled up the skill.
John Ellis: And so now they can do that specialized work. So now.
John Ellis: Orchestration, first of all, looks like just dispatch as many agents as you want, describe what each one to do, it will configure itself so it can do that work for you.
John Ellis: Second of all, rather than having complex communication between agents.
John Ellis: Have a task list. Have it write a file.
John Ellis: special kind of a file, but it's a pretty straightforward file. The task list of the overall task that's being done. Each agent then modifies, because remember, the agents can read and write files, right?
John Ellis: So the agent…
John Ellis: Adds to the file, saying, here's where I am, here's what I've done, I'm almost done, here's my finding.
John Ellis: All that goes into that one file.
John Ellis: And then, the originating agent can go and says, oh, it looks like I had everyone reporting back, let me take a look at what everybody found and what they did.
John Ellis: So rather than… Building the architecture, it is spun up based on your demands.
John Ellis: That's what changed in December.
John Ellis: Where it became much more flexible, much easier to solve broad ranges of problems that you hadn't specifically designed for.
John Ellis: Let me take, one more question, and then we're gonna break for lunch. Yes? So, since we…
John Ellis: install it on desktop, and let's say you may need access to your Google account, Gmail account, things like that, how secure
John Ellis: DC.
John Ellis: Like, or can we connect that to our email, or should we, shouldn't…
John Ellis: So, yes, you can connect to various
John Ellis: You have to think about where you're cross-connecting, because if something has access to your email.
John Ellis: And also access to other things.
John Ellis: Then bad things can happen. Cloud code is pretty secure.
John Ellis: Claw code is meant to actually carry out tasks, do things for you, and report back. Who here has heard about OpenClaw?
John Ellis: So, open claw, different kind of an agent, an agent that's meant to be always on.
John Ellis: Always available, that you can, like, text, and say, hey, OpenClaw, look this up for me. Where am I supposed to be next? Or, hey, OpenClaw, change this, text this person. So it's always meant to be in communication.
John Ellis: Cool!
John Ellis: Except it's always in communication.
John Ellis: Which means it can find things and be misdirected and then communicate out
John Ellis: So, completely insecure. The only safe way to run it, if you're going to run it all, is on a device which is completely separated from the other devices that you have. You might want to think really hard about which files you're going to have to give it access to, because it is always communicating, and those permissions are set to Universal, always, and yes.
John Ellis: So, incredibly insecure, but very cool. So we've got to figure out how to engineer first.
John Ellis: Because we've not been engineering well, we've not been, doing a good job of securing these.
John Ellis: Alright, it is time for lunch!
John Ellis: So, as Claude found for you, there are different places to have lunch, but you also can have lunch directly here. I'm going to be around, be happy to chat with you, look forward to talking.
John Ellis: And actually, One moment…
John Ellis: Did you all realize that you understand more than about 90% of people in the world how models work now? So, let's pause, give yourselves a round of applause.
John Ellis: Well, yeah, the deep dive actually was, ChatGPT 5.2. So…
John Ellis: When I met this last week, okay, people… Yeah, that's right, I was doing it in real time, yeah. Okay, and then you said, I tried to install a work on my…
John Ellis: And said there's something else you need? Yeah, let's talk about that another topic, yeah, yeah.
John Ellis: Yes, I'm… I'm new to this concept, so… Yeah.
John Ellis: when I see the article, I find it interesting, but I don't… I don't quite see how the, like, the bias to me that is related to the…
John Ellis: Okay, can you rephrase that just a little bit? Yeah, like, so, I mean, like, you show articles, show that AI can be in the email.
John Ellis: wrong of biased.
John Ellis: Well, that article was more about humans' use of it.
John Ellis: There are other articles, absolutely, that talk about bias, but bias is a very general term, so it's very specific about what type of bias he means.
John Ellis: So… Do you mean the… the training of the model? The… No, I understand.
John Ellis: Oh, so the, the, the article that we talked about with,
John Ellis: Illusion of explanatory depth and that.
John Ellis: Yep. I have a link for it in the repo, so you can sort of take a look at the article. The main point was, that article was about chat.
John Ellis: It wasn't about agents. And so the question is.
John Ellis: Does the story change? Because now we're talking about agents?
John Ellis: And as best as we can tell, the story changes some, because we're talking about ages. So some of the concerns we have before are not as much of a concern, but now we have other concerns.
John Ellis: Yeah, but I think, I think read that, read the paper is going to be really important to do. Okay. Yeah, great, alright, no, thank you.
John Ellis: Question, where… As far as the context of
John Ellis: I don't know how it says.
John Ellis: Are we still within the Venn diagram about just prompt engineering, or are things moving outside? I think we're well outside now. Even with reasoning models, no, you don't talk to engineer anymore. You state what it is, you give, you know, and then it goes on. Agents also especially, and you saw what I did there. I didn't say.
John Ellis: you are a software engineer, and you are an event planner. I said.
John Ellis: Man, I gotta switch these two things. Easy.
John Ellis: So when you're using these agents, like, there's no prompt behind the scenes, I mean, obviously? There might be, right? It depends on how you decide. Yeah, yeah.
John Ellis: The prompt behind the scenes is going to be visible, though, in what's called a pla.nd file. So, and we'll talk about those a little bit more in depth a little bit later, but those are, like, the general rules that you have for this particular subdirectory that you're working in, right? So, okay, whenever you're in the subdirectory, here are some of the rules to follow.
John Ellis: this table is garbage. We only have it here because of the, you know, this one. This other, this author is unreliable. You know, whatever, those are things that you write, you put in there as sort of the general rules of the road. Always give me mark down. It could be anything.
John Ellis: the skills are pulled up dynamically based on when the need arises. Those also, you can inspect and say, you know, you use the skill when, you do this in a new way, you bring this analysis, and then hope.
John Ellis: That's not context engineering, right? I mean, that's not… we're not prompting anymore. Now that that context is coming in in lots of different ways, sometimes from pre-designed prompts, the closest one may be the quantity. The skills themselves are prompts.
John Ellis: In a way, right? Yeah. But we're no longer doing the magic prompt.
John Ellis: It doesn't help to say, you are an analyst.
John Ellis: doesn't mean nearly as much. You might find that within the skills where it's saying you are acting as a subject of yourself. That'll still work, but it's no longer the single unitary prompt that's driving everything.
John Ellis: So, prompt engineering has changed.
John Ellis: I guess I'm trying to figure out, like, the balancing between all of that potential search space of where your starting point is before you, like, glide them on, and then…
John Ellis: So, what I thought now is, is the context. What are the things that I want to have?
John Ellis: in there. What are the papers? What's the background? What's the information that needs to be there?
John Ellis: For the model to have access.
John Ellis: For the agent to have access to.
John Ellis: Because that's really what's going to drive a lot of what's going on.
John Ellis: What are the skills I want to have there, and what are the starting instructions I want to add?
John Ellis: Because, you know, if I have enough context, I really do get to say sometimes, just, alright, tell me about this. Get me started.
John Ellis: Tell me about… tell me about the information, which is here in this subdirectory. And when you say contact, just to make sure I'm following correctly. And you're talking about,
John Ellis: B.
John Ellis: Recursive, just outputs of previous interactions with the model being included.
John Ellis: So, what ends up here? Now, in truth, the broader…
John Ellis: when I say in context, I'm talking kind of loosely, right? Because they're right… so,
John Ellis: We have one example where we work with the School of Engineering, I'm sorry, School of Medicine, and we have a subdirectory on this laptop with 1TB of information and 16,000 different files about the first year of medical school. And all the files having to do about it, you know, all the transcripts, all the PowerPoints, everything.
John Ellis: That's never fitting in. Right. But it is context for the agent, in the sense that it is reachable
John Ellis: there, and organized, and it can go in and find what it needs to pull in the specifics here.
John Ellis: This is a small window into a much larger collection of data.
John Ellis: And so, when I say contact, sometimes I take… I mean, like, oh, I provided it
John Ellis: as background, I don't know if it's going to get loaded up or not. I can check and see if it did. Okay. I've got one more small question. Please. Will we be talking about model design? Or basically, for example, that giant 1TB file?
John Ellis: Generating our own Deep learning. Your own…
John Ellis: So, do you mean I was, like, training your own model? Yeah, like, doing some post-training.
John Ellis: No. Because…
John Ellis: We do have material on that, and we do have material on YouTube on that. Okay. The reason why we're not is that, largely, that space of the needs has now been met by skills.
John Ellis: Okay. Do you need to train the model to do a specific thing? It was always messy.
John Ellis: It was always dangerous. You always have the risk of catastrophic forgetting. Or you can do parameter-efficient fine-tuning. You can do that. But there was always incremental, and
John Ellis: You know, did it actually learn the skill or the information?
John Ellis: If instead we have skills where we can state explicitly and expect what's going in.
John Ellis: Because when you train the model, you're not sure what it learned or didn't learn. Yeah. Here, the skill's like, oh, I wrote this… I wrote these 500 loans, I know exactly what it is, and I saw that it loaded it.
John Ellis: So I know that it was aware of it far more than if it was somewhere encoded in the MLS. It's more vettings, it's visible, it's less black box.
John Ellis: So, I mean, if I could… I mean, this is… you for a second. I'm in a Posit AI, or Posit, which is our studio. Yeah, yeah, yeah. They have an AI in it. Oh, cool. And so…
John Ellis: they are… whatever their skills file is, which I have not read, I'm not… I'm sure there are transparency somewhere, but, like, it is quite good at doing things, like, and so, like, I think the idea that, like, we're each gonna make our own, like, a skill file for each of the kinds of research we're gonna do is probably, like.
John Ellis: It's probably more likely organizational and disciplinary than it is, like, and, like, sub-organizational. There would be some disciplinary, like, effort to do that. But, like, you're gonna see this afternoon, so, Miguel's gonna be talking about skills that he's created. He's our event coordinator.
John Ellis: But he's created skills based on, you know, the broad stuff that's possible to. The better would be…
John Ellis: It'd be much better to have, like…
John Ellis: the association of all people doing data science with R, and the people doing great work for them, writing a really good skill file. Absolutely. And so, and, like, that was an actual quantum leap in terms of, like, the ability to, like, it still is like watching Aruba do, data science, as opposed to, like, where it backs up, like, a thousand times. Yeah. But it does.
John Ellis: It's much better at things than,
John Ellis: or rather, like, there is an actual time of production that's quite significant for the things that are there. My… in some ways, like.
John Ellis: the…
John Ellis: If I have the one add-on question to whatever we talked about before, like, not necessarily that this is a room.
John Ellis: it's a big room. It's that, like, some of those flaws are bound up in the feedback loop that exists where the output is going into the context. Yeah. So… and, like, that's not changed with agents, right? Like, agents are still adding to their own
John Ellis: Are they not communicating? Yes, except they can spin up additional pages that have… You're like, take 5 copies of you, and each try and answer this question.
John Ellis: The agents were first designed for code, but we're finding that they have tremendous utility elsewhere, but we've got it to go with the rules of the road. Yeah. So, my sense is, like.
John Ellis: aware there's a broader hype cycle, and I'm also concerned about the tendency to feel like,
John Ellis: Long-term problems that are embedded in large language models will
John Ellis: dissolve with the next generation of, like… Yeah, that's why I wanted to go back to, like, the really good part in, okay, here are the problems with… Yeah. You know, I like to go back to these, to these and say, you know, where are we now? I meant to start, but I only occasionally blog and share, like, what do I say? A, like, failure modes list. Yeah. And it is, it's a remarkable
John Ellis: like, the thing… the failure modes is a long list for me, and therefore, because I do most of the work that I do, I actually want it to be reliable enough that I can say it to other people, and so, like, there's just a minimal level, plus that there's actually publishing. So then, like, there's a… I have to do a lot of…
John Ellis: double checking of things, in order to make sure that… Sure, there's another link to another article in there, too, which talks also about that, you know, and, vigilance, fatigue, and… yeah, and I think that there are design patterns that we could follow.
John Ellis: also mitigate that. Again, it's not… these are things we need to be aware of and design with those people in mind. Yeah. We should never be checking the low-level stuff, but we should absolutely be putting in checks and gates
John Ellis: For, at the conceptual level.
John Ellis: That's… that's where we need to be. We're not there yet, because it's like all building blocks. It's… it's all building blocks. The thing that's…
John Ellis: So, like, because I keep, like, throwing things at you, like, what are the things that… and so, even at the, like, can you parse this graphic into all of the data sets? I have had, like, 59 correct when wrong come back, and I'm just like.
John Ellis: checking task is infinite, right? That's right. And that's where… that's where the design should be, along the lines of, you know, that's where it would make sense, in a genetic approach, it would make sense if you said, okay.
John Ellis: I'm going to give you… I want you to break this down with respect to… with respect to… and then I want you to take everything that was derived, and just see if you can find evidence for it. Yeah. You know, those… those are things that we sort of… that we do ourselves, but we do not instantiate you. And those need to be skills. Yeah, although that doesn't seem as sort of, like, if you can cost it free, which I'm not…
John Ellis: So I did,
John Ellis: So, like, the matching that I did, which, which I'm gonna have to,
John Ellis: kickoff, I think I took it out in front of you all.
John Ellis: So I did actually took a look at all the backgrounds of 174 of you, and we did matching of the top 3 people you should… you should meet with, right? Exactly. $6.79. Yeah. I'm confused.
John Ellis: At the depth there's the cops, I'm like… See, how much?
John Ellis: Yes, right, and, like, some of this is, like, which things can we put into our workflow, given
John Ellis: like, the mass subsidization that's happening now may or may not last forever. But the other thing I'm thinking about, that… that level of compute could have… I could have… Yeah.
John Ellis: So that's, that's, that's what gives me hope of, like, okay, let's say that, you know, OpenAI closed. You know, all right.
John Ellis: We got these bottles. Exactly.
John Ellis: Yeah, it's an interesting… It's an interesting place, just, like, to me, like.
John Ellis: a insufficient part of the AI literacy slash AI fluency discussion is teaching failure modes, because they're
John Ellis: really important. And in particular, the… like, do you think that it's buildable? A, like,
John Ellis: end of available knowledge token, because, to give the stupidest example, I have to have
John Ellis: I went through summarized, graduate applications. Yeah. And I got 4 really great ones, and then I had not sub-segmented the PDF to just have their application essay for the next ones, and it was kind of like,
John Ellis: Like, I'm not reading that. I have to go through and find it. And so it, like, we were a Latin American Folks Department. It's like, Cyprus Humanitarian aid in Cyprus was the first… I mean, like.
John Ellis: So, like, on a technical level, the ability of an LM to say, what I'm not going to give you is an answer, what I'm going to give you is don't know, seems like… and so I like to… I think part of the challenge is
John Ellis: is the use of it as well, right? Like, you shouldn't…
John Ellis: You don't expect, you know, you should never say, who should we let into the program? Yeah. Good God. No, what you could say is, make the most compelling, interesting case. Yep.
John Ellis: here's… here's my assessment, or here's the assessment that we have. Give me the assessment, and where this is landing. Make the most compelling case of why this person deserves to be in. All right, now, surface all the different things about this. Yeah. You know, that's… that kind of expl… that this is very explicitly going
John Ellis: broader, right? But we've got to do that. We've got to know
John Ellis: Yeah. The cost of doing it is so low with an agent framework than it is with chat. So, I guess what I'm still like, what I find myself doing is writing long programs and then using AI to supplement the coding. So, because the programs that I write can have
John Ellis: clear error messages. So if anything fails, then it's time? I'm just like, pay you. I've coded for…
John Ellis: I've been coding for 50 years. Yeah. And I never do that. Instead, what I do is I give guidance to, in particular, Claude 4.6… Yeah. …in, Claude Code.
John Ellis: Yeah. I mean, I definitely… there's a bunch of codings that it is spinning up, but, like, it just… it is under my guidance in writing better code than I know that I would. Not because I couldn't write the code.
John Ellis: Yeah, I would not, I'm not following. Sorry, I just had a question. You were saying…
John Ellis: It almost sounds like a… If only you could make, like, antipers… Yeah, that's correct. Yeah, like, for a lot of things. Well, and that was one that I put in, yeah. So you definitely can understand using this particular neuroscience, you have to decently owned skills.
John Ellis: I mean, like, there's, like… And it strikes me that, like.
John Ellis: use an agent and build a skill that has these criteria. One of which is to make… That's exactly… and one of which is to make software that is floating. So, those things, not with respect to if it can be made… That's what struck me when you're saying by coders.
John Ellis: But, like, what they cannot do that is if I instruct it, and call AI and not spits anyone else into my list of dollars. I can have scoring, but also… I mean, there are things that I've…
John Ellis: I mean, I've been… so that's… One of the things I work with is steal my file that has a specific script is the first thing that has an API call inside of it, that takes… Excellent. So now you're gonna start to get around this stuff, because there are… Yes, no, right? Right, it takes, you know, a second. And it had a lot of good information. Oh, absolutely.
John Ellis: that single context is just… What I would like to do is, deal with a slightly more complex thing, or as a dictionary, not those exact acronym…
John Ellis: You know, and now you're able to rerun the thing through the thing. For a document. That would be the appropriate. Thanks.
John Ellis: And I think that… There's a lot of…
John Ellis: For me, it's, like, emerged in partnership with this particular skill set.
John Ellis: like, I was coding for 5 or 6 years before I started, before Copilot existed, but it's helped.
John Ellis: And… I'm just curious about… Whether or not we're headed towards, like.
John Ellis: an ensemble approach. Especially if important things get… and that… maybe that's… Yeah. …something more about, but, like.
John Ellis: With these agents, you have each one being
John Ellis: Sounds like breaking into a much more simple one-step things.
John Ellis: and then you're just doing that… I mean, basically, you're just making almost, like, a niche version of the big lobby with more agents. It's like we've… yeah. I think in general, and the story that we're… that we've told is that
John Ellis: whatever, in whatever task that, like, you can incentivize a thing to learn how to do that task correctly over time. And my read is that's probably not true.
John Ellis: That, like, it is… that programming is sort of uniquely really good, for this, in that… because they're… because of unit testing, and you can't…
John Ellis: create, like, 500 different models, use analysis, and then be like, you're the right one, and the other ones get punished. Well, I mean, it's a language with, like, very strange in grammar, so I'm forced. Yeah. So it's actually… it is a really good English… Yeah.
John Ellis: your language here, translator. But still not…
John Ellis: Not a purpose zone, even when they specify as well. Right.
John Ellis: And I guess, like, kind of…
John Ellis: the discussion part of how you're using… how we use AI for research. This is where
John Ellis: I must… I wonder about how you… how far we can see in the future in ways where you're using AI to exact search direction.
John Ellis: Each layer of…
John Ellis: complexity of using these agents. Aren't we not just adding another body into your system and ending up with, like, 24, 5 bodies?
John Ellis: Yeah, I think of it more as, like.
John Ellis: Like, there are things on which, like, generation kind of sense, and therefore you have to, like, experiment and learn what the outcomes are going to be, and there are things… learn from things, like.
John Ellis: Which… which direction will science say? That, like, fundamentally applies to
John Ellis: learned with what it's called reinforced learning. You and you shared that with 15 or have, like, 50,000 years of experience to do the thing, and so, like, we're not.
John Ellis: Maybe it's not fixed.
John Ellis: Nice.
John Ellis: Too painful.
John Ellis: What's his name?
John Ellis: And other things people are asking for publishing?
John Ellis: I guess I'm sharing that.
John Ellis: Yeah, it's something, and or can function as a penny, right?
John Ellis: Describing an effect thing.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: Yeah, I think.
John Ellis: bye, come on.
John Ellis: And let's see if you can actually see which hits that.
John Ellis: you know, synaptron, so I throw out the phone, huh?
John Ellis: Like, unless you can follow your answer, it's not like the entire… on.
John Ellis: I don't know, like, say that any of our systems, forgive me, like, we have this, so…
John Ellis: So, we've had, like, so if it's nice and we earlier in life, so… Any, any sponsors?
John Ellis: They used to have us. They hate that, like…
John Ellis: But I don't think that we're…
John Ellis: I think that right now, they're kind of like, well, this… at least the number of research designs that involve hype and AI practical training is at least
John Ellis: everyone.
John Ellis: And it's the other.
John Ellis: Ethan said, psychology to enter the,
John Ellis: anthropology-based sciences, or, you know, well, I mean, like, whatever, like, on, like, when we're, like, describing graphics, when we're… when people are asking, like…
John Ellis: Two minutes.
John Ellis: Thank you for…
John Ellis: I hear it.
John Ellis: That'd be so nothing prepared.
John Ellis: And so we kind of participated.
John Ellis: See, bye.
John Ellis: That was already confined about.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: Great.
John Ellis: custom or not. Actually, that's exist, if not, but… just bothered about.
John Ellis: topic, but as far as… human interactions in life. How do you find this effect?
John Ellis: We're like… What is out there.
John Ellis: Bath Hill Pond.
John Ellis: Yeah, like, light, I don't know what's on the… I wonder if that is, it's… it's out there.
John Ellis: Yeah, I think, like, that is a…
John Ellis: Great.
John Ellis: Oh, Ben.
John Ellis: Very, that makes sense.
John Ellis: Excellent.
John Ellis: Yeah, throw it on.
John Ellis: Nice to meet you on property. Brockwell.
John Ellis: Is this good?
John Ellis: Oh, yeah.
John Ellis: He wants to…
John Ellis: She's been here since… Fantastic.
John Ellis: So it's… Yeah, what's up?
John Ellis: Just like… Sweet.
John Ellis: This is my name?
John Ellis: Let me ask you.
John Ellis: Sydney.
John Ellis: Exception.
John Ellis: That's expensive.
John Ellis: So good.
John Ellis: Yeah. Interesting.
John Ellis: It shouldn't think that's…
John Ellis: So
John Ellis: Let me just move space, so…
John Ellis: Sorry.
John Ellis: Amazing.
John Ellis: beyond this morning.
John Ellis: Okay, so…
John Ellis: That's how much you said.
John Ellis: Nope.
John Ellis: Check this. Okay.
John Ellis: And what do you see?
John Ellis: the brand change that I had CEO.
John Ellis: That's nothing to speak.
John Ellis: It's safe from the bottom.
John Ellis: Listen up.
John Ellis: I'm gonna just do.
John Ellis: Yeah, that's neat.
John Ellis: Okay, so it's not even really the same.
John Ellis: Spencer.
John Ellis: So yeah, I was up to that line, you know, that's my website.
John Ellis: Yeah, just a subscription.
John Ellis: It's a huge…
John Ellis: cement.
John Ellis: Yeah.
John Ellis: how much it would benefit? Yeah.
John Ellis: Yes, the potential.
John Ellis: Same time.
John Ellis: Student is huge, okay?
John Ellis: That's the last session there.
John Ellis: Excellent.
John Ellis: The best way to find that.
John Ellis: That's a validation rules.
John Ellis: They're part of the population distribution, It took 10 minutes.
John Ellis: Alright, jeez.
John Ellis: Sorry to be advised that we're not.
John Ellis: My name is Java.
John Ellis: Good evening.
John Ellis: to the printing.
John Ellis: That's why I'd like to just do my job.
John Ellis: For the one leads to the situation.
John Ellis: This is really neat.
John Ellis: Yeah.
John Ellis: But most of us are expensive.
John Ellis: It's nervous.
John Ellis: As in fact, two other things.
John Ellis: So, before… so…
John Ellis: You know, bumped.
John Ellis: It's a lot of…
John Ellis: I don't…
John Ellis: I shall steal the horse.
John Ellis: So to say… So, bye.
John Ellis: Yeah, I did.
John Ellis: That is pretty clearly.
John Ellis: excuse me, that's me.
John Ellis: So I've seen short courses, you know, 2-day, 3-day short courses, planning, 6 hours a day. I know, yeah, I find, like, school change rooms. Absolutely.
John Ellis: Every time I get tired, I think of them, like, well, they seem like doing this every day.
John Ellis: Yes. That's not any much of it.
John Ellis: So, you're always fast.
John Ellis: Some of these, slides that you've been showing? Yeah. So, are they available? Yeah, I'll have those on the, on the website as well, and…
John Ellis: Okay, huh.
John Ellis: I'm a senior.
John Ellis: That's always a problem.
John Ellis: I wonder if that means.
John Ellis: Of this.
John Ellis: A lot of people, so I said.
John Ellis: Actually, the plane's an inflection span.
John Ellis: Yeah, it's a different class.
John Ellis: It comes from leaving it plugged in most of the time. I know, yeah, I know. Yeah, exactly. They just don't… and then they start wearing out. I know, I bought a new…
John Ellis: personal laptop, and so I keep unplugging at every now and then. I switched over to Macs about a year and a half ago, so I could run models on them.
John Ellis: Even if you leave them plugged in all the time? Yes, but yeah, at some point, they'll start degrading, certainly.
John Ellis: Oh, definitely, yes, it'll… I… there may already be a link in the, repository. If not, I'll make sure that it's in there, but I think it's in there. Yes, absolutely. Yeah, all the slides, all the materials will make their way up probably tonight and tomorrow, you know.
John Ellis: Perfect, thank you. Yeah, that's right.
John Ellis: All right, let's go ahead and get started!
John Ellis: How many of you,
John Ellis: submitted a research statement or interest in the form when you first signed up. You uploaded that if you're interested in doing the networking event after this. How many people sent their stuff up?
John Ellis: Okay. We had about a hundred and… about 127.
John Ellis: So, I'd like to show you…
John Ellis: how I did this, I'll show you this quickly, because this isn't necessarily… I didn't use skills, but I want to give you another example of an agent at work.
John Ellis: So here you can take a look at,
John Ellis: Up here, and I'll read this so you can get an idea. Look at, and then I gave the actual web address of, of our event.
John Ellis: So I want to create a network opportunity by intentionally connecting people who uploaded their interests in a registration form to this directory. I want to make a case of why they should connect with 3 people. I'll send them an email with the people's names, their background, and the rationale.
John Ellis: rationale, oh well. Of why they should network… goals for networking are collaboration on research, grant applications, teaching, or just broadening their view of applications of AI. I want to automate this entire process, including sending the emails.
John Ellis: So, what's gonna happen here is that I'm asking the model to create, you know, a whole new…
John Ellis: program, right? That would actually do intentional matching of people, so this is interesting. It's going to be writing software to handle the mechanicals, but then it's going to be writing software to send messages to another LLM
John Ellis: To actually take a look at
John Ellis: Your background, and everybody else's background, and to make matches based on these criteria.
John Ellis: So… This goes on for a while.
John Ellis: Nope.
John Ellis: So it's… and I do have to iterate, so I… it worked for quite some time. I did have to iterate on it,
John Ellis: For a couple of different reasons. Marcus, are you here right now?
John Ellis: Okay, Marcus isn't here. Jesse Bloker, where are you?
John Ellis: So…
John Ellis: You notice that, and I'll go to the very end. One of the things I asked for was.
John Ellis: Find people that are different from me.
John Ellis: Well, there's enough homogeneity, where your broad interests
John Ellis: made it more possible to match you as having an interest different from other people, because you have so many different interests. So you showed up on, like.
John Ellis: 8 times as many matches as other people did.
John Ellis: And I finally had to undo it and say, no. People cannot meet with, like, 30 other people. So I had to unwind that a little bit. But here's an interesting thing, so now it's… so it's ready to go, I haven't actually sent it yet.
John Ellis: So what we're gonna do is we're gonna do a little experiment. I'm gonna say, hey, run this for me, and I'm gonna see if you start getting emails.
John Ellis: And if you do, it's gonna be an email that was just generated, where we actually just did the match.
John Ellis: So you can get an idea of who you might be able to match with tonight after, at 5.30, so we're gonna have a little bit of a break so we can reset, but the idea is, you look for people, you're gonna know their names, you're gonna know the rationale, it's even gonna make some suggestions about how you might collaborate.
John Ellis: Now, have some really funny things here of, like, so, Hamid, where are you?
John Ellis: So, yeah, so Hamid, you're… so, Hamid, you matched with Andre. So, it's good, it works, it matched you with your advisor. So,
John Ellis: It's gonna do stuff like that, because I did not give enough context to say, these people actually already know each other. All right, but here we go. We're gonna… I'm gonna just say, go ahead and run this for me, and monitor.
John Ellis: Oh.
John Ellis: One thing that I'll mention here before we start talking about skills.
John Ellis: See what this says? This is Compacting conversation.
John Ellis: So remember that I said that there is a specific context length for each of the models. You can't go beyond that, because the model can't actually operate at that point. You're done. You can't send stuff back, the loop ends.
John Ellis: So what agents do is they monitor to see when they get close to that. And when they get close to that, they take a look at the work that's been happening, and the work that's been happening recently, and any of the helper files that they've created, the task list, anything that's been going on, to create a brand new, clean.
John Ellis: Context.
John Ellis: So, here's a summary of what we did before. I'm gonna start anew.
John Ellis: Different agent harnesses are better or worse at doing this.
John Ellis: Cloud Codes agent is actually pretty good at doing this, but it takes a little while.
John Ellis: So you'll see that it actually is going to be, taking its time to go through there. But we're going to see how good of a job it does. We're going to return to it in just a little bit.
John Ellis: All right. So…
John Ellis: Oops, see, here it goes. Conversation compacted, notice it started over here. It's reading the code again, so it can figure out what's going on.
John Ellis: hey, and it's saying, yes, go ahead and echo yes. So, yes, go ahead and call the code that I wrote, that it wrote.
John Ellis: And send the emails, and we'll see if it starts, if it begins sending.
John Ellis: So, after lunch quiz.
John Ellis: What do we call… That file, where we encapsulate process knowledge, specific process knowledge around a task.
John Ellis: Or background that we then make available to the AI.
John Ellis: It's a skill.
John Ellis: That's right, so they're called skills.
John Ellis: you can begin to understand why it's difficult for me to get the model to understand what I'm talking about, because I say, hey, I want you to write, I want you to use skills. It's like.
John Ellis: I got skills.
John Ellis: No, no, no. I mean skills as…
John Ellis: So let's go and take a look at what we mean by skills.
John Ellis: Very explicitly.
John Ellis: There we go.
John Ellis: So… Let's first take a look at What a skill actually is.
John Ellis: So… a skill… It's actually a subdirectory.
John Ellis: A skill is a subdirectory in a particular location that the model has access to. And in this subdirectory, first of all, the name of the subdirectory is the name of the skill.
John Ellis: And then, within that subdirectory, it has an MD file. Remember the Markdown file?
John Ellis: So it's a simple file, we're going to actually see what it looks like now it's formatted. This is going to be the main part here.
John Ellis: The skill entity Has, at the very top, It's called metadata.
John Ellis: It has the name of the skill.
John Ellis: And a description of the skill.
John Ellis: This is going to be the part of the skill which is always loaded. If you have 100 different skills.
John Ellis: available to your agent, it's going to load up all of those. But remember, these are pretty short descriptions, but it's going to know all of them. It has to have those in there, because it has to automatically be able to say, oh, you're asking me to create a workbook
John Ellis: I have a skill that tells me how to create a workbook, I need to load part of it.
John Ellis: The skill loads… Only what's required.
John Ellis: So when it says, oh my gosh, I need to have the skill, it would load first the skill.md.
John Ellis: And again, let's think about what this means. That means
John Ellis: You ask for something to be done.
John Ellis: it knew that there was a skill that could do that, so it loaded it, so now…
John Ellis: Your description of how to do the thing is right next to the request and the information that you needed to do the thing.
John Ellis: That's a really nice design.
John Ellis: Next.
John Ellis: As it goes through, it determines whether it needs to have additional information.
John Ellis: So I think I've mentioned to you before that when it's creating PowerPoints, when it's creating workbooks, it's actually writing Python code, which then creates those artifacts. It's not directly creating those, but it's writing Python code to create
John Ellis: the binary compatible XLSX file, or the PowerPoint, right?
John Ellis: Scripts are going to be another subdirectory underneath, which will have optional executable code,
John Ellis: References, this could have documentation.
John Ellis: And you can also have assets. These could be the fonts, the templates, this could be code stubs, things along those lines. As you can see, it's actually fairly rich.
John Ellis: And you don't have to… it will only load up as it's needed, so it's not like you're taking up a bunch of space.
John Ellis: What's compelling to me is that there's enough room in here for us to be… rigorous.
John Ellis: As academics, or rigorous in terms of good designers, where we cite where everything is coming from.
John Ellis: So this is the place where you can actually make sure that…
John Ellis: It's clear what this is based on.
John Ellis: Talk about the…
John Ellis: I'm going to next talk about the design principles and sort of what this means, but questions right now about what a skill is.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: Or… scripts that might have burdened and inspiration that tie, where's that? Okay.
John Ellis: So there's some information here which is not… it's all… it's all semantic, right? This is not…
John Ellis: If you've written software before, you know that you've coded against APIs. You've actually done where it must take this particular format, and you have to be very careful about versioning, blah blah. Here, this is all semantic. Skills can be used by
John Ellis: different models.
John Ellis: As a matter of fact, I just recently, we just had a training, Joanne and I, and Maha, and a few other folks, had a training where we actually introduced the idea of skills to a model that doesn't even use skills.
John Ellis: We said, alright, your model has… doesn't use skills, but you can copy and paste the text of the skill, and it'll still work.
John Ellis: If the model uses a skill, then it will find it automatically, load it automatically with progressive disclosure.
John Ellis: Meaning, loading up only what it needs, when it needs it.
John Ellis: So, progressive disclosure. First, The first level is the front matter. This is going to be the title.
John Ellis: The name of the skill, and also a description of the skill.
John Ellis: And this is where the human comes in. You have to do a really good job of describing when and how this might be called.
John Ellis: So, if people call this different things in their chats, you put that in there. They might refer to this as… they might refer to the task like this. You would do it when?
John Ellis: Because the skill is only good if it's called.
John Ellis: Next, the second level is going to be the SkillMD body, and this is going to be… this is… it's going to load up this when… when Claude thinks that it's really going to use it, it loads up all of that, and then comes all the linked files, everything that comes in, after that.
John Ellis: Claude can load multiple skills at once.
John Ellis: So one of the things that we don't yet have, but that we will have shortly, is a brand skill
John Ellis: For the College of Connected Computing.
John Ellis: Because, you know, people want to know the fonts exactly right. We may want to have sort of an open and fun and interdisciplinary kind of look for the images that we might choose to have for it.
John Ellis: So if I make a PowerPoint, yes, the PowerPoint skill will be loaded, and the brand skill will be loaded, and they can work together.
John Ellis: This is impossible with normal software!
John Ellis: You don't get to just slap together, you know, one piece of software with another piece of software. But this is what software increasingly is going to look like for us. It's going to be skills.
John Ellis: Infinitely composable.
John Ellis: And bound to our understanding of the semantics when we create this, right?
John Ellis: This is a very different way of thinking about software. And finally, they're going to be portable. They work identically across… well, it just says this is Anthropic, so they're saying, hey, it works identically across all of our stuff.
John Ellis: They actually open-sourced this, and so OpenAI, so the ChatGPT, that's adopted it.
John Ellis: Google has adopted it. They're… most of the really good… most of the good small, small language models and open source models have adopted it.
John Ellis: So here's the interesting thing, when you put in the effort to design a skill.
John Ellis: That can be used across all major LLMs.
John Ellis: Had a conversation over lunch where
John Ellis: The idea came across that, discip… there ought to be disciplinary skills.
John Ellis: So, if you have a particular way in which is a best practice way of doing, say, a statistical analysis, or modeling, or an approach, or even, you know, formatting a paper correctly, it ought to be a skill, and this ought to be a skill which is provided to you by some sort of organization. If you want to have
John Ellis: A common way where you're kind of sure that you're making something which is… which is repeatable and good, open science.
John Ellis: Increasingly, that's going to be in the form of a skill.
John Ellis: Where everyone agrees, because everyone can read it and say, yeah, that's how we think about it. And that's how we would like for it to be done.
John Ellis: Increasingly, this is what I'm telling organizations as well.
John Ellis: around adoption of AI and adoption of AI tooling, is that skills are going to be the way both that you standardize what's being done, you have insight into how it's being done, and you also invite people into the process of designing how AI works.
John Ellis: So, that's why I call a skill a socio-technical skill.
John Ellis: Alright.
John Ellis: So let's go and take a look at,
John Ellis: How you would create a skill.
John Ellis: You might recall that I did mention
John Ellis: that skills that are authored solely by AI are not that great, and they don't improve models all that much.
John Ellis: They can work somewhat, especially if you have the model doing research on something and pulling lots of external content.
John Ellis: to be able to build a skill. But even better is when you have an expert building a skill. So this is… this is you.
John Ellis: So, before you write anything, identify two to three use cases your skill should handle. So, for example, hey, project sprint planning. This is what I mentioned before about software development. A lot of this is around software development, but we're realizing that this goes beyond… well beyond, as you're saying, software development.
John Ellis: Trigger. User says, help me plan this, or create sprints. And here are the steps. Just very broadly, fetch the current project, analyze the team, suggest prioritization, create tasks.
John Ellis: This document is linked, in the material for this.
John Ellis: But keep in mind, this is a very human process. How do you tackle this problem? What are the… how do you identify when you're going to be doing this, and how do you actually go about doing this? And are there specific tools that you need to use in order to carry out this task?
John Ellis: Anthropic identified Three broad categories, but we're only going to talk about two of them here.
John Ellis: One is document creation. This is one of the first things that they did.
John Ellis: Last year in September… I don't know if you all remember this, but before September of this past year, you couldn't get models to make
John Ellis: PowerPoints.
John Ellis: You remember that?
John Ellis: you'd be like, you'd get all excited, you get on Amplify, and you say, yeah, make me a PowerPoint, and it'd be like, here are the points for your PowerPoint for you to put together.
John Ellis: And you were very disappointed.
John Ellis: Well then, in September, Anthropic all of a sudden could create full power plants.
John Ellis: Full doc… full doc… full Word docs.
John Ellis: full workbooks.
John Ellis: All of a sudden, Actually, what they did was…
John Ellis: they developed skills. And the very first skill that they developed was, this is how you build a PowerPoint.
John Ellis: And this is… and what they did was, you can imagine, under the scripts they had, Python code.
John Ellis: that would… that could be modified, that would then generate the PowerPoint. And then they had other things that they began to iterate on of what it meant to create a good-looking PowerPoint. Did anybody create PowerPoints, early on with… with Cloud?
John Ellis: Yeah, were they good, or were there problems?
John Ellis: So for example, I wanted to use, like, Vanderbilt, like… You wanted to use the Vanderbilt color scheme, it couldn't. Yes. Did you have the problem where it had, like, text that would, like, run over, or something like… like, it's outside of the box.
John Ellis: So then they changed the skill.
John Ellis: They didn't retrain the model, they didn't change anything, they changed the wording and the skill, and what they said was…
John Ellis: Before releasing the PowerPoint, Load the PowerPoint and visually inspect it.
John Ellis: Look for the following problems. Problems with contrast, problems with text outside of bounding boxes, text that is too small.
John Ellis: Now, it got to do this because the LLM did have these tools, and they're multimodal models, or they can call other tools to help them see.
John Ellis: But they just had to specifically say, the best practice is, before you hand this out, look at it.
John Ellis: So now, when you actually generate these things, it says, now visually inspect it.
John Ellis: So think about the huge advance that is from changing the wording in the skill.
John Ellis: So, one is documented asset creation.
John Ellis: The other main, type, application, is… Workflow automation.
John Ellis: I think both of these are incredibly important for us, but also workflow automation, especially around research and process.
John Ellis: We're always concerned about, about
John Ellis: about documenting and best practice and being able to follow what's being done and how it's being done. Skills are going to be a powerful way for us to do this.
John Ellis: How many of you, well.
John Ellis: How many of you have labs, and you've been thinking, I really need to write down some of this stuff, so when we bring new people in, that they'll follow the process? Yeah. Okay, yeah, hands up high, if you… let's seriously just write it. Okay, keep your hand up if you've actually done it.
John Ellis: action.
John Ellis: one shining night out of… so… Again, socio-technical solution, you…
John Ellis: create the skill, because now you can have the AI do it, but now you have the skills which can also be read by the new members of the lab, and can also be audited and modified to reflect current best practices.
John Ellis: It's visible.
John Ellis: It's auditable.
John Ellis: So that's why I'm very excited about the advent of skills.
John Ellis: I'm not a shining knight, I just work with power tools when I teach lab, and that's kind of important. Right, so if you teach the skills, then you must do that. Tom.
John Ellis: Is there an effort to try to create skills to share across the university? So, as an example.
John Ellis: We're always iterating when it comes to folks putting together. Oh. My. God.
John Ellis: Okay.
John Ellis: Yeah, or say she's paying for dinner, but you didn't… And it often follows that.
John Ellis: Faculty students, or graduate students. Graduate students don't know, riding a dolphin, and so that it…
John Ellis: And it's always gonna start.
John Ellis: All those things are the same. So let me, let me, let me put this. If we had recorded what you just said.
John Ellis: Just what you said.
John Ellis: And then… If we had gone to… I have a time loop?
John Ellis: Yes, okay. Then if we'd gone to…
John Ellis: The skill creator skill.
John Ellis: This is how you create the skills.
John Ellis: So you actually have the conversation about what works and what doesn't work.
John Ellis: about making those schedules. Because you remember.
John Ellis: The agent did a really good job of reorganizing when I had, like, 9 hours of material on the second day, and not enough material on the first day, and not enough breaks to go through there and actually iteratively go through and figure it out.
John Ellis: You just have to know what the requirements are.
John Ellis: You must have a potty break before you have the meeting with… Absolutely.
John Ellis: So that's what the Skills Builder skill does. So… so this is the subdirectory.
John Ellis: So, all the skills are under a skills subdirectory, usually. Here's the skill creator. It has… oh, it has agents, assets, eval viewer, it has a bunch of stuff it uses. Let's go and see what the skill itself says.
John Ellis: Name, skill creator. Create new skills, modify and improve existing skills, and measure skill performance. That's critical.
John Ellis: We need to be able to iterate on the skill set of how well they work.
John Ellis: Use when a user wants to create a skill from scratch.
John Ellis: Update or optimize an existing skill, run evals to test a skill.
John Ellis: Benchmark skill performance with various analysis, or optimize a skill's description for better triggering accuracy.
John Ellis: All right, so now this is the body of the skills, that it will look… if you said, man, I really want a skill to handle the situation where we're always bringing people, and there's a problem with organizing, and we tend not to.
John Ellis: So, the skill triggers, and it copies into context the following.
John Ellis: A skill for creating new skills and iteratively improving them. At a high level, the process of creating a skill looks like this. We were just talking.
John Ellis: Decide what you want the skill to do, and roughly how it should do it. Have a draft of the skill. Create a few test prompts. Help the user evaluate the results both qualitatively and quantitatively.
John Ellis: Notice that we don't have to… we can keep things at a high level, or we can get very specific.
John Ellis: Your job when using the skill is to figure out where the user is in the process in… where the user is in the process, and then jump in and help them progress through these stages.
John Ellis: Think about how flexible that is.
John Ellis: The problem with software, and the problem with us trying to build solutions to this point has been they're brittle.
John Ellis: it breaks. Or it's like, you don't want to use the software because now you have to click on everything that you've already clicked on before. Here, by simply stating that what you want is to determine… have the LLM determine where they are in these stages, and if it determines that you're already on step 4, join them in step 4.
John Ellis: And I love this.
John Ellis: Look at this.
John Ellis: Then after the skill is done, but again, the order's flexible, you can also run the skill description improver, which we have a whole separate script for to optimize triggering of the skill. Cool? Cool.
John Ellis: It's English!
John Ellis: Does it actually carry some meaning?
John Ellis: Maybe.
John Ellis: you'll know Dwayne Watson. He's the vice provost now, but he's done research in, computational linguistics, and he, he's actually uncovered the
John Ellis: the really important information that is covered in ums and uhs. It turns out they really convey information. This probably conveys information. And of course, you can test it, you can see while it works, but if the idea is to be loose
John Ellis: In the application of the skill, that achieves it.
John Ellis: Why? Because it's a large language model, and if you say to someone, cool, cool.
John Ellis: This is not like, do you understand?
John Ellis: This is cool. Alright.
John Ellis: So, communicating with the user, Creating the skill, capturing intent.
John Ellis: What's interesting is, you can read this skill.
John Ellis: And get better at creating skills. And then you can use this skill.
John Ellis: To actually make and keep track of all the different steps.
John Ellis: Principle of lack of surprise. This goes without saying, but skills must not contain malware, exploit code, or content that could compromise system security. Seems kind of silly to say, but…
John Ellis: If you have this in there, then the LLM will actually go through and check your assets.
John Ellis: Go ahead and check the scripts and say, So, this looks like malware.
John Ellis: But it might not unless you had actually asked it to.
John Ellis: This is one of the most extensive skills that you will find. It is far, far longer than the skill that you would normally create.
John Ellis: But it's also doing a great deal. Normally, skills should be about 500 lines, not a whole lot longer.
John Ellis: All right. Question about skills so far, yes?
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: This is great. Thomas wants to be a new itinerary.
John Ellis: Skill that he's given you so hard to offer that.
John Ellis: But how does he share it with his graduate students, and share it with me, so that I know that I don't have to recreate that student.
John Ellis: So, a couple of things. One, we're going to be creating skills Tomorrow.
John Ellis: Matter of fact, that's a lot of what we're going to be doing. We're going to be creating skills
John Ellis: Because we don't really build software like that anymore. You build skills to do the tasks, if the tasks are done, then why did… you know? So yes, we're going to be creating skills, absolutely, probably quite a few of them. Second of all, they are just files, they're subdirectories.
John Ellis: Right now, there is no… Good, organized way, right?
John Ellis: Accepted way.
John Ellis: I think those will likely have to be institutional in nature.
John Ellis: I think that…
John Ellis: That will be adopted by industry in one way, by government in another, by our organizing communities in yet another.
John Ellis: And that's okay, because you might have skills from many different places. You're definitely going to have skills from Anthropic, you know, they have a killer PowerPoint skill now, but you're also going to have a brand skill, which is probably going to be produced by and blessed by your dean's office.
John Ellis: Great! Yes, let them own that.
John Ellis: And then all they have to do is to share… it comes as a zip file.
John Ellis: So it's a zip file, and we're going to find out tomorrow to go through the skills… the specifics, but it's a zip file, and you expose it to Clog. Let's go and take a look at what Clog has here, as a matter of fact.
John Ellis: I might have to be careful about this, because it's… because I do have a student's name… no, no, I guess I don't, not here. Okay, great. All right.
John Ellis: Recommendation letter. Recommendation letter writer.
John Ellis: So here's the thing. First of all, I don't know about you, but this gives me a little bit of a tingle, like, except that when I write a letter, I want to write the stories about what makes this student different.
John Ellis: But I have to get through all this other stuff about how I know them, how long I've known them.
John Ellis: what classes they were in, what they did in the class, I have to go and look and see what the project that they did, so I don't do any of that anymore. What I do instead is, I have them send me their CV, if they have one. I have them send me a file which said, if they had their druthers.
John Ellis: So I know that they have to look that up.
John Ellis: What a druther. You know, saying, I'm not going to necessarily include it, but if you, if, you know, if you had your choice, what do you want me… what do you want me to say? I put my resume in, because that has when I worked on projects, and what I did, and what classes I taught, so I can actually tie and get the names of the… of those things correct.
John Ellis: And then I had this long monologue with the computer about this student.
John Ellis: So there's this one time.
John Ellis: You know, where Lori was in class, and she wouldn't let an idea… she just kept on at it until I actually realized that I was wrong.
John Ellis: So… It is that fortitude and that bravery which he will bring to your
John Ellis: Those are the stories I want to tell. So all of that goes in, and then I say, I want to write a letter of recommendation, and it triggers this skill.
John Ellis: So what does it do?
John Ellis: Well, it says, if I'm missing any of those things, so I don't have the student's CV, or Jesse's guidance notes, or the support level, supportive,
John Ellis: Strongly supportive.
John Ellis: without reservation, ask for those. Do not… do not go forward unless you have those.
John Ellis: And then there might be other things. Students' own notes, what the students hope the letter will cover, their druthers can't even put in the druthers. program guidance, instructions, or criteria, so if I know they're applying to a certain place, I'll actually put those in. They're applying for a postdoctoral position, that is going after the, the following.
John Ellis: And then, this is where it has my background in there as well, just to figure out how I fit in there, because I will weave in my background to sort of
John Ellis: put into the letter why I'm a good person to be writing this letter, so I just put everything in there, but it weaves it in. All right, so…
John Ellis: Here's what needs to happen, it has to have the opening, it has to have the body, the broader impact, the personal qualities, tone. Honest and positive.
John Ellis: So how did I get the tone? I actually had to look at a great deal of my writing to figure out how to describe it. And I also have, in the assets, in the subdirectory, I have an example of a without reservations letter.
John Ellis: A strong recommendation letter, and just a plain positive letter.
John Ellis: Because if it's any lower than that, then I tell the student I really can't write.
John Ellis: Bye.
John Ellis: And, and, you know, and describe what they are. Without reservation, the fullest, most detailed letter, every paragraph should build a compelling case, use the strongest language that Jesse's notes support.
John Ellis: Professional but warm. Specific over general, honest, contextual credentials, forward-looking.
John Ellis: So… and then I have guardrails in there as well.
John Ellis: Support level matches Jesse's stated level throughout. No accidental inflation or deflation.
John Ellis: Every specific claim traces back to the notes or the student's CV. So it's… before it gets done, it's doing a double check for everything that's been generated.
John Ellis: The letter addresses the target program's opportunity specifically. Names what they're looking for includes it in the letter, contact info, and tone is consistent, warm, professional, personal.
John Ellis: So it goes through, and it generates what often is a pretty decent first draft, and then often I will go in and edit more, but I'm finding
John Ellis: as I iterate the skill more, It's getting closer and closer.
John Ellis: So, now I get to the really pure stuff.
John Ellis: The things I forgot, the things I want to mention, the color that I want to put into the letter.
John Ellis: So this is an example of a real-world skill, and how did I get it in there? Well…
John Ellis: Let's say I'll go back.
John Ellis: So, in Claude, even just the chat, because remember, it works across all of these, I…
John Ellis: go here, and I go to Settings, and we'll be doing this more, but I'm just gonna get you ready for this. Go to Settings, and then I go to…
John Ellis: Capabilities.
John Ellis: I'm gonna go to the bottom, And it says, skills.
John Ellis: And then I go to Customize.
John Ellis: And then… It tells me about all the different skills that I have.
John Ellis: Loads them up here, and then here are all the extent… here are the other ones that I could have there as well.
John Ellis: So, you load them there, and they're sitting there waiting to be used. Whenever I'm in any chat.
John Ellis: When I'm having any chat, any Clawed code, any Claude co-work, it looks for when I start talking about writing a letter of recommendation for a student.
John Ellis: And then we'll fire.
John Ellis: Yes. Yes. Yeah, it's… the steps are a little bit different, right? Steps are a little bit different of, like, where you specifically put it, but it's still the same zip file.
John Ellis: That you put in there.
John Ellis: Interesting thing, it's kind of a pain to edit.
John Ellis: So what I often will do, instead of directly editing, is saying, hey, I want to… I tell ChatGPT, hey, I want to edit the skill.
John Ellis: include the following. But if necessary, I will download it, unzip it, and edit it directly myself. We've got it… that's… that's… that's a little bit clunky right now. I think that will need to be fixed. Also, it's not easy to version, and to know which version you're on, so a lot of this needs to be in the text of the skill. What version is it?
John Ellis: So, that's a lot of work that we need to do, because that infrastructure isn't there yet. And yet another question.
John Ellis: under hip off, like, say, can you see, like, asking how to search for something?
John Ellis: So, yeah, skills can be posted.
John Ellis: However, Skills have the ability to actually run arbitrary code.
John Ellis: They're designed that way, because they have to be able to have, remember the scripts that I mentioned before? So if you're doing an optimization, if you want to do, like, the scheduling properly, or even better yet, if you want to create a skill that would allow a student to take a look at their schedule.
John Ellis: And to game it into the future, and to figure out if they can actually fit that third major into their degree program before they graduate, then you'll want to have an optimizer, a really good optimizer to run through all the different possibilities.
John Ellis: That's arbitrary code execution.
John Ellis: So, if someone says, hey, I got a great skill for you, here's the zip.
John Ellis: You gotta know who that person is. And you gotta trust that person to have made good choices as well, because otherwise you have to go into and look at all the different subdirectories and make sure it doesn't have malware.
John Ellis: So we still have to be careful, and we don't have a really good way of vetting that yet. So create them yourself, create them with people that you trust, have an agreement of how you're going to be handling these. Yes.
John Ellis: But for others, other situations where a letter could be,
John Ellis: prospective students off a little bit too much.
John Ellis: I was wondering how an alternative skill executes the concepts that are found in ways to see whether or not it matches the level of the tabs.
John Ellis: So that's sort of the flip side of the letter, or writers sort of see if there's anything which is different.
John Ellis: It could be. I do like to use AI in those situations never to score, unless there's a clear rubric, never to score and tell me who I should let into the program, because remember, you might remember this…
John Ellis: Remember this?
John Ellis: MLP?
John Ellis: Trained on everything on the internet?
John Ellis: So if you directly ask the model, so who's going to be the best graduate student?
John Ellis: You're going to get an answer that is fully informed by all the bias which exists in everything that we've written and everything that we've done.
John Ellis: So instead, you can use the model to say, tell me where there's a variance, or I've already… so this student is in the no pile.
John Ellis: Make the best possible case. Use deep thinking.
John Ellis: All the information, make the best possible case for this student to not be in the no pile.
John Ellis: And then if I'm… if I'm not… if I'm not swayed by that, then I'm… I'm… I'm pretty… I'm pretty comfortable.
John Ellis: That they belong in there, because it couldn't even… using everything at its disposal, it couldn't make a case.
John Ellis: So, I think our use of the models and how we position them is really important.
John Ellis: Other questions?
John Ellis: Let's take a look at another couple of, of, of skills.
John Ellis: And actually, oh!
John Ellis: Hey, it says all 117 emails sent successfully. Did y'all get emails? Yes. Alright, what do you think of the recommendations? Are they good?
John Ellis: Alright! So…
John Ellis: today, 5.30, we're gonna have, you know, we'll have an opportunity to meet afterwards, we'll have drinks, we'll have, you know, it's a good opportunity here to actually go and chat with these people that have been suggested to you by the AI. I did…
John Ellis: Now, I gotta say, I went ahead and said, spare no expense, go ahead and do deep thinking.
John Ellis: So, I want you to know.
John Ellis: that in generating these, I did spend $6.69.
John Ellis: on this. So this is quality stuff.
John Ellis: Let's go and take a look at another skill.
John Ellis: So… See if, okay.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: So skills that are available from, Anthropic are safe. You can, you can find, trusted, places
John Ellis: You can also use existing skills and modify. So the brand guideline skill, for example, is a great place to get started for that. During our session with, where Jesse Bloker's going to be leading us off, talking about academic uses of AI, I'm going to be talking about a skill that I developed to
John Ellis: Update my resume.
John Ellis: In a way that's, that's, blessed by the provost.
John Ellis: Let's go and talk about, skills that are kind of interesting. It's not just about document formation, it's not just about process, necessarily. Here's one that's a little bit more process, but it's…
John Ellis: To me, it's fascinating.
John Ellis: Doc co-authoring. Guide users through a structured workflow for co-authoring documentation. Use when a user wants to write documentation, proposal, technical specs, decision docs, or similar structured content.
John Ellis: So… When you go through here.
John Ellis: Notice how the wording works. This is when it's triggered. Initial off offer.
John Ellis: So this is the interface.
John Ellis: The initial offer is, the agent comes back and says, hey, would you like to have a structured
John Ellis: Workflow for us to do this work together.
John Ellis: I'll do context gathering, we'll do refinement, and then we'll do reader testing. Does that sound good?
John Ellis: And then… You can actually… Instantiate best practice.
John Ellis: The questions that you would ask.
John Ellis: Or you can have information dumping, clarifying questions.
John Ellis: So, you know, generate 5 to 10 numbered questions based on gaps in the context.
John Ellis: So, think about this. So, it's giving guidance to the agent that it needs to assess whether there is any gaps in the information, and that it should then give you specific questions, clarifying questions, to go after that information. You are very much steering the action of the agent.
John Ellis: Remember that the very first agent that we had was the Deep Research.
John Ellis: Very useful, not steerable at all.
John Ellis: Then we had, agents that would actually do coding for us, also not terrifically steerable. Now we're… now we have very steerable agents, based on what we put into the skills.
John Ellis: And I hope what you're getting is the idea here that you can solve a variety of problems so long as you can define what the task is, and so long as you have a way of you yourself tackling the problem.
John Ellis: You can see here why this is…
John Ellis: this really can't be generated by AI. This is a person, right, who says the person might be
John Ellis: You know, if they're doing, because this is, during context gathering.
John Ellis: When the user signals they've done their initial dump, of information.
John Ellis: So this knows how people work, which is we just spew out everything that we want to have in the documentation. It's not structured. We'll dump a recording in there of what we did, or we'll just all of a sudden share everything that we want to have. It knows that.
John Ellis: The person who wrote this has dealt with people who do this all the time.
John Ellis: And this person knows that the next thing you've got to do is
John Ellis: Read what they've done, look through it, then ask clarifying questions.
John Ellis: And this is the whole… this is the whole, you have an exit condition. You have enough information. Transition, ask if there's any more context.
John Ellis: So… There's a way to control flow of the interactions.
John Ellis: And, also, at the end, what we'll see… is…
John Ellis: A final review.
John Ellis: So all the best practices that we like to hold, where before you do anything, you actually do a final check, that can be included as well.
John Ellis: This final check can be…
John Ellis: Just the AI itself, this can actually be running software, this could be doing checks, pretty much anything that you want to have in there is possible to put in there.
John Ellis: So let me, let me pause here.
John Ellis: Because understanding the broad capabilities of agents is going to be rather important.
John Ellis: What questions do you have about agents? Yes?
John Ellis: Okay. How, like,
John Ellis: Like, if you're working with trying on data from, say, like, census, or to do a task, Wow.
John Ellis: Thanks for trying to think about, like… No, please.
John Ellis: And the question is about census, and you're getting lots of different data. Even just census data itself. Yeah. It's like, you know, the track versus, you know, the…
John Ellis: What's the other one?
John Ellis: Tracked versus… Yep.
John Ellis: See, this is all the stuff that I know. So, there's all this particular domain knowledge around census data, and you have to understand that some of the divisions have to do with homogeneity, and others have to do more with geography, and they're different.
John Ellis: And there are these particular rules about aggregation at different levels, depending on how many people there are in there. But this is specific domain knowledge that you must know in order to work with this. That goes in the scope.
John Ellis: But do you still need to think about, like, data pipelines? Data pipelines? So no… So, data pipelines.
John Ellis: And, and, and, and… Here, they go into a little bit more, detail.
John Ellis: Oh, here we go.
John Ellis: So, we didn't talk about this as much because it's just a little bit out of the scope.
John Ellis: But here.
John Ellis: And… Here.
John Ellis: One of the tools that you can have access to.
John Ellis: Is going to be…
John Ellis: model context protocol. You might remember that I mentioned this just briefly before, where I said this was a way to expose capabilities
John Ellis: very generally to, AI models.
John Ellis: MCP is a way to expose your database, your service.
John Ellis: two models very broadly, and it doesn't matter which AI is going after it, OpenAI, ChatGPT can access this.
John Ellis: Clock can access this.
John Ellis: But these are heavier weight. These take more space in the context, but they're very useful, but this is the way that you can get data or have actions done for you by another server.
John Ellis: This is the connector that we used to have to build manually. This is the pipeline that we used to have to build manually.
John Ellis: Many services now are available through an MCP, so we no longer have to wire it up ourselves, and…
John Ellis: Skills can call these.
John Ellis: And they can provide additional information about what this is about and when you would need this MCP.
John Ellis: MCPs are older.
John Ellis: The problem was the model knowing when they should use it, so… and it took up a lot of space, and so people would load up all these MCPs and would burn up a lot of their contacts before they could even do anything, and even then, they'd be very explicit and say, use this server to do this thing.
John Ellis: Skills solved that.
John Ellis: If there is no MCP that they don't provide you… If there's no MCP, then… then that's when you have a nice sit-down with Claude Code, and you say, help me come up with a flexible way to actually access this, or make me good boilerplate code, which I can then, if I have boilerplate code.
John Ellis: then I can actually put that into… The skill itself.
John Ellis: Right? Because remember, in-skills are… In the outline of skills, we have…
John Ellis: In skills, we have the skill MD, we have scripts.
John Ellis: So you actually write the script of how to access that data, what server you need to go to, what authentication you would need to have, and then you put that in the skill, and you say, if there is no… if there is no authentication, or if the user did not provide information.
John Ellis: then ask and lead them through actually going and getting a key, so they can get access to it. And here's the boilerplate
John Ellis: Python code to do it.
John Ellis: When that's provided, go ahead and run this code with the following Check for an error.
John Ellis: You know, describe… so all of that can be done This is…
John Ellis: As opposed to software that we used to write, which would be brittle.
John Ellis: you try to put all that instruction in there, and then they change the API.
John Ellis: Scheduled.
John Ellis: Oh, you hit the one soft spot. So the question was…
John Ellis: How well does it handle scheduled tasks?
John Ellis: And it doesn't.
John Ellis: But this is… this is an issue with AI, right? With AI, nothing happens until we request. That's why I call it a crystalline intelligence, right?
John Ellis: So that's kind of reflected in here, too. There are services that will trigger, but they have to be outside services that will trigger and cause this to happen. Now, you can have a nice sit-down with Cloud Code, and you say, I want to figure out how to do this, and here's my setup, and here's what I run, so you can do that, but no, that's not like a service right now.
John Ellis: But it probably will be before too long.
John Ellis: Yes.
John Ellis: I just did census.
John Ellis: mining for the first time. I'm so sorry. So you just did census mining for the very first time. Yeah, good times. Good times. I never read the micro data before, because, like, why do I do that? And dial up with
John Ellis: sign in and thought, yeah, I did this thing. What I strongly recommend as a workflow, even if you don't program, is
John Ellis: ask at the end of your conversation, when it has sorted things out, to create a reproducible copy.
John Ellis: in UMD, is the way that I'm doing. Like, if you're in… I know the equivalent is in Python, it's sort of the other thing, right? And then save it, and then make sure that it runs, debug it, but the big…
John Ellis: So that then you have the top-to-bottom code rather than a skill. You can also have a skill to read code in the future, but then you can just run it again and set it on a prompt thing for people.
John Ellis: So… Let me go ahead and, and
John Ellis: And again, mention the Skills Build Your Skill.
John Ellis: For many of the processes that you have.
John Ellis: The way to create the skill is to gather the documents, everything which is important, which is relevant. You want to have all the relevant information about this. This could also be your monologue about what's important and what's relevant.
John Ellis: And using the skills builder… the Skill Creator skill, you can then create a first draft of the skill. Remember, it's readable.
John Ellis: So then you read the skill. Does it have extraneous information? Wrong information? Missing information? This is all something that you can actually assess.
John Ellis: And that's how you create your skill. Yes? Can a skill…
John Ellis: Call another skill if it might require it.
John Ellis: A skill can call another skill. As a matter of fact, even down here, it was mentioning a little bit that it could call another skill for validation, and that's actually what's happened. You tend not to try to write skills that will necessarily chain and call each other, because maybe it would, maybe it wouldn't.
John Ellis: You need to rethink the skill if it requires changing. It probably needs to be, or you need to decompose that task in a different way. Let me take one or two more questions, and then, we're going to switch over. We're going to be talking about defining AI augmented academic projects, when it helps and when it doesn't, with Abby Picilante. But one or two more questions. Yes?
John Ellis: mentioned that we can upload documents. Are there specific formats we can upload, for example, audio files, or… Yeah, so the question is, so what I was saying, so you upload all the relevant documents to help you create the skill.
John Ellis: So, most… many models are multimodal, some are native multimodal,
John Ellis: Native multimodal means that they share the same latent space. They were… they were trained on words, just like images.
John Ellis: Just like audio. There's a rich sharing of information there with those models that's very successful to put, all types of information. But even models like Claw that are not multimodal, have adapters, and so they can, at the very least, read and translate, and so it can be used by them.
John Ellis: So yes, all the formats are fine. As we talked about, you know, they're uglier doc formats, you know, it's XML under there, so it's got a disentangle a lot. That's okay, it can do that. It'll probably write some code to do that for you and pull the text out, is what it's going to do.
John Ellis: Other questions about skills?
John Ellis: Yes. So, there are companies like MoodleBox that come pre-programmed in with, like, skills, agents in it, and the ability to adapt those.
John Ellis: Now, is that to run within their platform, or to run…
John Ellis: So, they have pre-made skills for things like syllabi.
John Ellis: brain writing and all of that stuff. Are they true skills? How long have they been around? How long have they had the skills?
John Ellis: The company is somewhere around 10 years old right now. And they've had the skills for a while? Yeah, they… Yeah, they're not skills.
John Ellis: So this is the problem. So we've had AI since the mid-50s, and so when people say AI, they might mean something very different. When people say agents, if agents have been around for more than just a year, they probably mean something very different.
John Ellis: And so we just have to be very careful and inspect and ask what it means. And actually, the skill, you can say, let me read the skill, and they say, well, you can't read a skill. You can say, well, that's not the kind of a skill that I'm interested in. Well, they have, like, an interface in it to help you write the skill.
John Ellis: Interesting, yeah, but if you can't read the fi… it would be interesting. So, but now you know, you know what this looks like. Yeah, exactly. You can look… yeah, but if it's any older than December.
John Ellis: Embedding something else.
John Ellis: But you know what to look for. You know what to look for in a skill. You actually can read it, you can assess it yourself, you know what's possible with the skill. So now you yourself can actually see if this is… if that skill and that agent is being consumed or being run by something, anything other than
John Ellis: an AI, an LLM, then it's something else. Something different.
John Ellis: Alright.
John Ellis: Additional questions?
John Ellis: Excellent. You're gonna have an opportunity to have hands-on experience, writing skills. I'll end with just a quick, quick story.
John Ellis: And I did mention this before, the tech sell-off.
John Ellis: about 4 weeks ago, I guess it is now, about $283 billion worth of capitalization of technology stocks, software stocks, in particular, technology that had to do with legal software.
John Ellis: Huge sell-off.
John Ellis: And what had happened was that Anthropic released, really, a handful of skills That did legal work.
John Ellis: Looking much like this.
John Ellis: But describing best practices, maybe also providing some software with it, All open source.
John Ellis: And what happened was, Agents, augmented by those skills, outperformed.
John Ellis: ALL.
John Ellis: Of the dedicated software that had been developed to carry out those tasks.
John Ellis: And people realize, well.
John Ellis: why am I paying $100,000 a year for the license when I can do that with a general-purpose agent, with just a vanilla agent that can take on the capabilities that I need
John Ellis: when I need them.
John Ellis: And it's an extraordinarily powerful way to solve… an extraordinarily powerful new way to solve problems, and it's not just for law, it's for us.
John Ellis: All right, thank you all very much for all of your attention and for getting through all of this. One more round of applause for you for getting through all of the technical stuff and knowing how to create skills.
John Ellis: We're going to take just a brief break, just a few minutes, while Abby comes up and we get set up for the next session.
John Ellis: Oh, yes, Anna?
John Ellis: Yes, it runs on the software right now.
John Ellis: So, because… It's built on… on… it's built… yeah, Cloud Code is, like, Cloud CodeWorks is built on Cloud Code.
John Ellis: So it's not yet being amplified.
John Ellis: No, no, no, most, most of the Amplify, will not be, does not do agents. Understandable. Now, there are ways you can run, so the way that I square it is, if they share anything with me that they did not have in a public resume.
John Ellis: If it's in a public resume, and if it's something that they're fishing with each other to do, then great. But if they're telling me a deeply personal story of why something happened, well, that's a good… Yeah. Okay. Yeah.
John Ellis: I would say go, go ahead and register, and you'll give me an email.
John Ellis: on.
John Ellis: chomping on the bit to try to create a field.
John Ellis: At, vanderville.edu. I would say, yeah, I would say, so I would say, yeah, kick it off. All right, so…
John Ellis: I've got, like, a million examples, so I think that's perfect. So, you might need one, then maybe Miguel, and then maybe we, and there's more time, there'll be more. Right.
John Ellis: Excellent, so nice to meet you. Yeah, then I teach you how to…
John Ellis: Yeah, no, absolutely. No, I'd love to chat. That's lovely, I think that's a…
John Ellis: I think it's a great document.
John Ellis: That's right. But, you know, even if you have, like, a… like, imagine an assessment… Yeah. You know, like, okay, so my father was a methods teacher.
John Ellis: But I know, you know, that, the Korean Methodist argument was really, in some ways, you know, cultural distinct problem, not in medicine.
John Ellis: So what is… right? And so…
John Ellis: If you had a way to sort of capture what some of those things were, or documents, or, you know, capture some of them, you could have a skill which would assess or provide feedback on how a particular sermon might lanes.
John Ellis: Oh, that's right? Oh, absolutely. That's right. That's right. In some ways. Exactly, yeah. Yeah, I would say, yeah, we'd love to… so please feel free, if you'd like to have coffee sometime, let me know, we'd love to chat.
John Ellis: Excellent. Absolutely. It's a pleasure meeting me. Absolutely. Thank you.
John Ellis: Okay, thank you so much. Thank you so much, I appreciate it.
John Ellis: That means a lot, coming from someone in your field, actually, so…
John Ellis: I'm so meaningful. I'm so good. Okay. Okay, are you in the… join the Zoom? Okay, let me go and, and you join the Zoom.
John Ellis: Yes. Okay, I'm gonna go and get, John to get this one to join the same day, because we've, we've sort of fallen off track a little bit. I'll be right back and check. And we'll start up in about,
John Ellis: The morning of Easter.
John Ellis: So, exit for you.
John Ellis: Okay, yes, and I have the…
John Ellis: So I need to end this for you? Yes. Okay.